Hello this is Washington DC station there is a fire at the Starbucks building please come quickly
Hello this is Washington DC station there is a fire at the Starbucks building please come quickly
Hello this is Washington DC station there is a fire at the Starbucks building please come quickly
Hello this is Washington DC station there is a fire at the Starbucks building please come quickly
Hello this is Washington DC station there is a fire at the Starbucks building please come quickly
Hello this is Washington DC station there is a fire at the Starbucks building please come quickly.fuck.He just shot my friend.with going.i want to get a protein.I like him because he place his house.plaze.I like brazil.One evening in the 1980s, photographer Kathy Shorr was at her home in Greenwich Village, New York, alone with her toddler, when two men dressed as postmen turned up at the door. The intruders forced their way into the house and burgled it, all the while threatening Shorr and her daughter with a gun.
What had always been a distant, abstract thought suddenly became a tangible and terrifying reality. ¡°I know what it feels like to have a gun pointed at you and the person closest to you,¡± Shorr says. ¡°That¡¯s a feeling that you never want to experience again, and you don¡¯t wish on anybody. It¡¯s a complete loss of control over your life, and somebody else taking that control.¡± Although both were unharmed, the incident left them shaken. ¡°It¡¯s not something I think about all the time, but an experience like that goes into your psyche ? you can recall it and still feel it. It¡¯s part of me.¡±
Years later, when she was working as a teacher, Shorr started noticing that her students were wearing laminated photographs to commemorate friends and family who had been killed with guns, turning the victims, she felt, into ¡°folk heroes¡±. She became interested in the idea of what happened to the people who survived being shot, so at the end of 2013 she embarked on an ambitious two-and-a-half-year project: photographing 101 survivors of gun violence in the place where they were shot. ¡°Lucky¡± is a word that often comes up in relation to those left alive, but the photos document the injuries, scars and trauma that regularly follow a shooting; one spread of pictures shows those who are now using wheelchairs.
Although initially wary of bringing back painful memories, Shorr found that the people she approached were enthusiastic about speaking to her. By the end of the project, survivors were getting in touch asking to be included; only two of those contacted declined to take part. Going back to be photographed was often the first time the subjects had returned to the scene of the shooting, so Shorr made sure she spoke to them for at least half an hour ? one conversation went on for three hours ? to establish a rapport and to make sure they were ready.
What frequently followed the photo was a sense of release, says Shorr: ¡°I heard from so many people how cathartic it was to go back to the place, take back the space and make it theirs.¡± One girl says the project ¡°gave [her] a sense of closure¡±. Many of the subjects have since become Shorr¡¯s friends: ¡°I feel a real bond with them, a connection: they shared probably the most traumatic thing that¡¯s ever happened to them with me. They did it because they wanted to help other people.¡±
In 2013 there were 84,258 nonfatal injuries caused by firearms in the US, affecting people of all ages, ethnicities and backgrounds. The book reflects this, with victims aged from eight to 80 all over the country, ranging from bishops to accountants, professors to sex workers, rock musicians to third graders. The locations, too, are familiar: schools, gyms, churches, shopping centres. ¡°Never in my wildest dreams did I think I would be shot with a gun,¡± says one survivor in the book, Mariam Pare¢¥. ¡°I had lived my entire life thinking that was the type of thing that happened to other people in other parts of the country, or to people in books or TV. Until, one day, it happened to me.¡±
Behind every photo is a different tragedy: the people who pulled the triggers were spouses, siblings, strangers, policemen. One woman was shot by her ex-husband as she picked up her daughters from nursery school: he shot her 14 times, using two guns. Another woman ? a fifth of those photographed are domestic violence survivors ? was injured by her abusive boyfriend in a botched murder-suicide plan. A six-year-old boy at a Jewish day camp was shot by a neo-Nazi.
But what could have been a bleak, emotionally draining project ended up being a life-affirming one. ¡°I was amazed by how these people had moved on with their lives and got stronger and more empathetic. Every time I left a person I felt in awe of how courageous and determined they were, and I came away from the project feeling the goodness and the strength of the survivors.¡±
Shorr felt it was especially important to include photos of gun owners, army sergeants and National Rifle Association members. ¡°My feeling is that responsible gun owners are the people that can do something to make it harder for people who shouldn¡¯t have guns to get them.¡± According to a study she references in the book, an estimated 9% of Americans with anger issues have access to a gun. When I ask how the current administration is going to change gun control laws, she lets out a forlorn laugh. ¡°I thought things were bad, but they¡¯ve got progressively worse. Right now, people can¡¯t talk to each other, they can¡¯t see the other side. The book is meant to create a dialogue. We¡¯re never going to come up with a solution that both sides will be totally happy with, but there has got to be compromise about this issue.¡±
Kathy Shorr¡¯s Shot: 101 Survivors of Gun Violence in America (powerHouse Books) is out now; shotproject.org
Dallas police sergeant Shyrica Wesley, 38, (pictured above) was in a parking lot at Walmart when her husband shot her in the face before killing himself. She has seven children and remarried eight years ago
This year it¡¯ll be 10 years since I was shot. It happened 26 August 2007. I had been going through a separation with my husband. He was very abusive, physically and emotionally. I came here from Louisiana after [Hurricane] Katrina, and I already had four kids when I met him. I didn¡¯t really know anyone. I didn¡¯t really know my options. Once I left him, he started following me. He would show up at my job, anything to have some control over me.
It happened on a Sunday. I was going to Walmart to pick up stuff for my kids for school. The store was maybe five minutes from where we lived. He followed me in his car and sped ahead of mine. When I got caught at a red light, he got out of his vehicle and jumped in with me.
I pulled into the parking lot. I remember the conversation. He was like, ¡°Is there anything I can do? I can¡¯t lose my wife, I can¡¯t live in this world without my wife.¡± And I just told him, ¡°No, I¡¯m done. I can¡¯t do it any more.¡±
I was getting ready to get out [of the car] when I received a call that two of my co-workers had died. My husband then started trying to console me. And I said, ¡°No. I want you to leave me alone.¡± I wiped my face from crying and pulled the latch on the door, and then he shot me. But I didn¡¯t know he¡¯d shot me. I thought he¡¯d punched me because I was used to physical abuse by then and I didn¡¯t hear a gun go off. My face was just vibrating.
I continued getting out of the car and stood up and said, ¡°Somebody help me. Lord, help me.¡± And I remember a lady saying, ¡°Somebody get me a cell phone, she¡¯s been shot.¡± When she said that, I put my hand up to the right side of my head and my index finger actually went into the hole where he had shot me. And I started panicking.
I could see him looking out the back window of his car. He was just looking and looking. By the grace of God, there were some paramedics in Walmart and they saw me collapse on the ground.
When I collapsed, my husband thought I had died. He turned around, and the car moved. And the lady with me said, ¡°You have kids in the car.¡± I said, ¡°No ma¡¯am, I don¡¯t, don¡¯t leave, you¡¯re the one that¡¯s keeping me alert.¡± The paramedics were trying to get an IV started in my arm, and the woman pulled away and went to the side of the car, as she thought there were kids in there. She told me later that he said, ¡°My wife¡¯s gone, I can¡¯t live in this world without my wife.¡± He put the gun into his mouth and pulled the trigger. The last words I remember before I blanked out were her saying, ¡°He dead, he dead, he just shot himself!¡±
He shot me at point-blank range in the right side of my temple. It broke the bone behind my eyes, it broke my nose. It created a wave of damage and destruction throughout my entire face. It¡¯s all titanium plating under the right side of my face. Sometimes I feel self-conscious. But I try to look at the positives.
I was a detention officer back then. Five months later I took the written test for deputy sheriff and passed. Then I took the physical and passed. And the physical test that we go through at the academy is not easy at all. ¡°I can¡¯t¡± is not an option for me.
My current husband, he¡¯s also a police officer, and a minister. I¡¯ve never had any type of abuse from him. He¡¯s my rock. We had the triplets together, girls, they¡¯re six. And he adopted my other kids. He¡¯s been real supportive.
I look at the fact that I¡¯m still here, and think about how I¡¯m gonna make the most of it. I don¡¯t see myself as a victim or a survivor; I see myself as an example. A lot of people lose their self-worth after this, and it¡¯s been the total opposite for me. As told to Flora Carr
Liz Hjelmseth, 53, lives in Washington State with her husband and their 14-year-old daughter. She was eight when she was shot by her 16-year-old brother at their family home in Montana
The day I was shot, it was Halloween. It was a pretty exciting day ? I was going to be able to go trick or treating by myself. I came home and found my brother had been scratched by my cat. He was pretty angry and I put myself between him and the cat. It was hunting season and we had our guns just out in our front porch area. My brother went and got one of them. I think he was trying to scare me ? isn¡¯t it sad that I don¡¯t know?
He told me he was going to shoot me, then pointed the gun at me. It was a 30-30 rifle, common for hunting large game, elk. A very powerful rifle. I was sitting down, crouching in the corner of the room and the bullet went through my arm, then through my leg. I heard later that the bullet lodged in the wall. That single shot almost blew my leg off.
Luckily for me, my sister was home. She took me to our family practice doctor, who bundled me up and put me in the back of his station wagon. His wife drove me 20 miles to the hospital in Bozeman, where the team of doctors saved my life.
When I woke up after being unconscious for a week, there was a story established that my brother was playing with a gun and it accidentally went off and I was just in the wrong place at the wrong time. No one knew about the fight with the cat.
I didn¡¯t tell anybody the truth about what happened. At the time, I was really afraid for my brother and felt protective of him. Maybe that¡¯s a victim thing, I don¡¯t know.
I have never talked to him about it. People ask why all the time and I can¡¯t say. Sometimes, I feel that if I start talking to him about it, it would rip too big a hole in our relationship. I don¡¯t know what the aftermath of something like that is, living a lie for that long.
When I was around 30, I had a bit of a breakdown and went into therapy. My therapist thought it would be a good idea for me to clear up the misunderstanding and tell my parents the truth. They said they¡¯d felt that maybe it had not been an accident but didn¡¯t push it. It is hard to have uncomfortable conversations.
My sciatic nerve was taken out by the bullet, so I don¡¯t have any control over the lower bottom half of my leg. I wear a brace. I had physio for years and I walk very well. People usually can¡¯t tell that there¡¯s anything wrong with me unless I get tired. But inside, I¡¯m still tender. Even today, when I knew I was going to be doing this interview, I cried taking my shower, knowing I¡¯d have to talk about it again.
There are lots of activities that I can¡¯t do. Everybody skis here and I can¡¯t do that and I can¡¯t run. These are the two things, oddly enough, that my daughter loves to do. These are things I don¡¯t get to experience with her. She¡¯s on a ski team and I¡¯ve never seen her race, because I just can¡¯t get to the races. I live in fear of getting older and that, at some point, I might not be able to walk.
When my daughter was eight, I would just look at her and see how tiny she was, how innocent she was. When she was small, before she went over to anyone¡¯s house, I had a conversation with the parents, to make sure there were no guns in the home that weren¡¯t stored properly. Only once did I have someone say: ¡°We have a handgun next to our bed¡± and I said: ¡°Well, I¡¯m sorry but my daughter can¡¯t play with your child.¡±
My husband hunts and owns guns, but we store them properly in locked safes. In my opinion, that would have prevented my getting shot, if my parents had had proper gun storage. It wasn¡¯t even a consideration, growing up, but now people know. I do work contacting people about getting safe gun legislation, and child access prevention legislation. But it¡¯s not really going anywhere. It¡¯s a crazy place and time we¡¯re living in right now.
I did get to hold the gun that shot me. My sister owns it now and last time I visited, her husband asked me if I wanted to hold it and I did. I¡¯d never held a gun before. I was struck by how heavy it was. To pick something up like that ? it¡¯s a very determined effort.
Kathy¡¯s photograph captured something that¡¯s still a little tender for me. You get over it, you move on and I have a wonderful life ? but there are some raw edges. And sometimes they catch. FC
James Armstrong, 28, lives in Bozeman, Montana. He was shot four years ago while leaving a house party. He lost a leg. His friend, who was also shot that night, died.
I find Kathy¡¯s photo of me hard to look at. It was taken on the spot where I was shot and it¡¯s a reminder of how much my life changed there that night. In the photo, my prosthetic leg is in my hand.
I was shot at 4.30am after a friend¡¯s birthday party. That night, we¡¯d gone out, we had a good time, we all had some drinks. Then we came back to a friend¡¯s house. It was when a group of us were leaving that someone threw a beer bottle. So I yelled something. I said: ¡°Who threw that?¡±, because, you know, there were a couple of girls with us. And this guy walks into the light and says: ¡°I¡¯m sorry, I¡¯m sorry, don¡¯t want to start any trouble.¡± He put both his hands up. From there, he got close enough to hit me in the mouth. Then he turned and ran away, so fast he kind of stumbled. He lived next door to where the house party was and he just ran home as fast as he could. My brother grabbed me around the waist and said: ¡°It¡¯s not worth it, let him go.¡±
We continued to head towards the truck. The next thing I know, I see the guy coming back. All of a sudden, he fires a shotgun round into the ground. I said: ¡°What are you gonna do now, are you gonna shoot me?¡± ? and when I said that, he fired right into my leg. Then he turned around and fired right into my friend¡¯s stomach.
Then he ran away again, leaving me and my friend lying on the asphalt.
It almost seemed surreal. How could this have happened? There were people screaming. My friend was screaming. My brother called the ambulance and it seemed like it took an eternity for it to get there.
The last thing I remember my friend saying as he lay there was: ¡°I don¡¯t want to die.¡± I didn¡¯t find out he¡¯d passed until a couple of days after. My doctors told everyone not to tell me. They wanted me to focus on my own recovery and not to have to worry about it. But when they told me I was still in hospital and it was really hard. I just couldn¡¯t believe it. He was a good guy. There was a quote that one of my other friends came up with, from a song: ¡°Everybody dies, but not everybody lives.¡± My friend did everything he ever wanted to do. He had no regrets. He was just a very good guy, a good dude.
I was bitter when it first happened. Now, I think that it was more of a wrong place, wrong time situation. During the trial, it all came out that the shooter was former military. His lawyers¡¯ case was that it was PTSD. He went to prison, though. I think he knows that he made a mistake. I think he knows that he took someone¡¯s life that didn¡¯t need to be taken.
Before the shooting, I was working in the oil fields in North Dakota. It was all outdoors on an oil rig. A good job, but really hard, tough work. Now I do excavations, operate heavy equipment and I bar-tend on the side. It makes it difficult, only having one leg. It¡¯s tough, it has its challenges. I get sores. At work, I have to be careful of walking on uneven surfaces, because I lose my balance a lot more easily. With some of the equipment, you have to use your feet and I only have one foot.
I have to put my prosthetic on every morning, I have to take it off at night, and I have to take it off to take a shower. I stand on one leg a lot.
I have a girlfriend, and we¡¯ve spoken about the shooting, but it¡¯s one of those things that¡¯s hard to talk about and I don¡¯t really like to.
I still live in Bozeman and the place I was shot is about a block off from the main road. When I go to the actual spot, it¡¯s weird to look at it and think, this is where I lay not knowing if I was going to live or die. This is the last place I saw my friend. FC
Antonius Wiriadjaja, 33, teaches interactive media at New York University¡¯s Shanghai campus. He was working as a researcher at the New York campus when he was caught in a shooting in Brooklyn at the age of 29
The biggest thing for me has been the realisation that a lot of problems with gun violence have a relationship to violence against women. The reason I got into this horrible mess is because as I was walking down the street, a man was shooting at a pregnant woman. They had their own dispute and I wasn¡¯t part of it, I was an innocent bystander to violence against this woman. It¡¯s something we desperately need to address here in the US.
It was the 5th of July, and because it was the day after Independence Day I had the day off. I had promised my friend that I would help her move. It was a 90-degree weather day, and usually I bicycle everywhere but because it was so hot I decided to walk to the subway. It was 2pm, and as I walked I thought I heard fireworks, which is to be expected the day after Independence Day. But when I looked down I was actually bleeding from my chest, and I realised that I¡¯d been shot.
I found cover. The bullet went through my chest and it travelled to my stomach, and I was in a lot of pain. Like somebody kneed me in the gut and also hit me in the back. It was really difficult to breathe, it felt like daggers were stabbing into my chest every single time I took a breath. I remember looking into the sky and I saw the light going through the leaves of the trees, and thinking, ¡°Wow, it¡¯s so peaceful now.¡± The birds were chirping. I was starting to lose consciousness, and I was helped by some of my neighbours ? one, a barber, put his hand over my chest and pushed down to make sure I didn¡¯t bleed out, and a woman kept talking to me, making sure that I stayed awake.
Then the ambulance came. I fell into a four-day coma, and I woke up and I was the happiest person on Earth, because I¡¯d survived.
The week before I got shot, I was asked to start teaching at NYU in New York. And I actually did end up teaching in the fall, but not until October, so I had more time to recuperate. But there have been two big long-term effects. The first one is lasting pain. I lost a bunch of organs including my spleen, so I have to get vaccinated for things like the flu more often. I also had PTSD ? it was 17 months or so before I was even remotely prepared to walk down the street without getting scared and nervous.
The other knock-on effect is the financial burden. When I left hospital, the first thing I got was a medical bill for $100,000. I was very lucky because I have health insurance for my work, but I couldn¡¯t work for several months, I was in physical therapy. I took a full-time gig in Shanghai in part to pay off a lot of my bills.
When I saw the picture [above] I was struck by how dramatic it is - the scar was still pink, and there¡¯s the blood [red] awning in the background. I remember thinking, ¡°Wow, that¡¯s actually very beautiful.¡± I¡¯d never felt that way about the scar before. FC
¡°How many of us have actually heard the sound of a gunshot? It¡¯s much more difficult to identify than you may think.¡±
Damaune Journey, vice-president of security solutions at SST Inc, is explaining the benefits of his company¡¯s product, ShotSpotter, a gunshot detection system that¡¯s the latest in security technology.
Here¡¯s how it works: in a given area, ShotSpotter sets up multiple sound-monitoring microphones, which detect gunfire based on the company¡¯s algorithm. If ShotSpotter picks up anything, the audio recording is sent to a 24-hour monitoring center in Newark, California, where it¡¯s reviewed by experts, many with previous law enforcement training. The results are then transmitted to local police officers.
According to ShotSpotter, all this takes approximately 30 seconds ? significantly faster than the typical 3-5 minutes for the first person to call 911 once a shot is fired.
The system has been installed for about a decade in high-crime urban areas and near military bases, in the US and overseas. ShotSpotter covers more than 300 square miles in at least 90 cities across the United States.
Now, the private gunshot detection company is branching out towards a new market of security tech consumers: college campuses.
In 2014 ShotSpotter launched its SecureCampus technology, offering the sound-monitoring hookup to campuses across the country. In September of that year, the Savannah College of Art and Design (SCAD) became the first school in the nation to install ShotSpotter, and on 17 June, Newark Memorial high school¡¯s principal, Phil Morales, a former police officer, announced it had become the first high school to plant the technology throughout its campus. So far only these two schools have bought ShotSpotter, but it probably won¡¯t stay that way for long.
¡°We¡¯ve had a variety of colleges interested in the project, from all over the country ? east and west, large and small,¡± Journey said. ¡°The interest seems to be growing.¡±
Journey would not reveal how many schools are considering adopting ShotSpotter, but he did say: ¡°We haven¡¯t deployed it in any elementary schools at this point in time, but we certainly know that the technology is useful in all sorts of settings.¡±
The company is hoping there will soon be a groundswell in the use of ShotSpotter in schools. A paragraph from the SecureCampus page of ShotSpotter¡¯s website reads: ¡°In the next few decades, this indoor/outdoor safety technology will be as commonplace as fire alarms and sprinkler systems are today.¡±
But sprinkler systems don¡¯t come with built-in invasion-of-privacy implications, which some experts and politicians worry about with ShotSpotter.
ShotSpotter claims it has no interest in recording private conversations on its system, which continually erases the data it picks up every one to two days. According to ShotSpotter¡¯s privacy policy: ¡°The entire system is intentionally designed not to permit ¡®live listening¡¯ of any sort. Human voices do not trigger ShotSpotter sensors.¡±
According to the ACLU¡¯s Jay Stanley, there¡¯s no reason not to believe the corporation¡¯s claims, but that doesn¡¯t mean there¡¯s no cause for concern.
¡°How can we be sure that the technology is in fact confined to listening for gunshots? How can we ensure that it won¡¯t expand over time to more and more uses?¡± Stanley said. ¡°I would want some sort of independent auditing of the technology and how it works to be done, ideally that¡¯s what we would have.¡±
In March, New York City police commissioner Bill Bratton and Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the city would begin installing a ShotSpotter pilot program in 10 Brooklyn precincts and seven in the Bronx. The city¡¯s public advocate, Letitia James, has introduced a bill to the city council that would require quarterly reports on any data collected by ShotSpotter as well as any gunshot reports.
Many have questioned whether ShotSpotter could constitute a fourth amendment violation ? warrantless search and seizure of public sounds.
A New York Times article from 2012 that compared the gunshot detection device to body cameras, GPS trackers and license plate scanners reported on a murder case in New Bedford, Massachusetts, where ShotSpotter recorded a conversation that took place just before the shooting. A debate brewed over whether the audio would be admissible in court.
Frank Camera, the defense lawyer on the case, told the New York Times that the technology is ¡°opening a whole can of worms¡±.
¡°If the police are utilizing these conversations, then the real issue is, where does it stop?¡±
In another case, five years earlier, 14-year-old DeOnte Rawlings was shot and killed by an off-duty police officer in Washington DC who claimed he suspected Rawlings of stealing a minibike. ShotSpotter footage was used to show that the first shot came from a firearm nearby where DeOnte fell, not from the officer in question, James Haskel. That data was cited in the investigation that sided with Haskel a year later and cleared him of any criminal wrongdoing.
This was the third time Haskel had shot someone while off-duty and subsequently been cleared of all charges. It was the first time his actions had proved fatal.
In 2011, after more details of the case came to light, Rawlings¡¯ family settled a $100m civil lawsuit against the city and the two officers involved in the shooting for an undisclosed amount.
At SCAD, the first school in the country to install ShotSpotter, the system has yet to generate much conflict.
Erin Branch, who graduated from SCAD in May, said she had no idea the technology had been installed, but that it sounded like a great idea. ¡°I think this ShotSpotter is a wonderful tool to help prevent gun violence,¡± she told me. ¡°I like the idea of the police knowing right away when a gun is fired.¡±
SCAD was in talks with ShotSpotter to install gun detection technology for a few years, but it wasn¡¯t until last year that the school took the plunge. It¡¯s not, however, the only safety measure SCAD has purchased in recent years.
¡°ShotSpotter was just another prong in that implementation in that use of technology to make the campus safer,¡± says John Buckovich, chief of the department of public safety at SCAD. About a year ago the campus started using LiveSafe, an app that allows students to send footage and texts to campus police if they see something suspicious.
Over the past couple of years, SCAD has also expanded its camera system to building exteriors, the main entryways of academic buildings, residence halls and parking lots. It also built an operating center to monitor those cameras 24/7.
According to SST¡¯s corporate overview, this is how ShotSpotter is meant to be used ? as part of a comprehensive surveillance network: ¡°ShotSpotter solutions integrate with other systems in your environment to permit the sharing of data across systems, roles and other agencies. ShotSpotter can connect to CCTV or video management systems to direct cameras to other surveillance assets towards incidents.¡±
Buckowitch described SCAD¡¯s use to technology to supplement their safety and security programs over the past few years as ¡°aggressive¡± and ¡°progressive¡±.
According to Buckovitch, SCAD is not a ¡°traditional campus¡±, in that its buildings sprawl across two square miles of Savannah. ShotSpotter has been installed throughout Savannah¡¯s historic district and downtown area, which comprise in part non-university-affiliated residents and businesses.
Buckovitch told me: ¡°Anywhere in that two square miles ... if a shot is fired, even if it¡¯s not near SCAD¡¯s campus ? it could be two, three, four blocks away ? the police department is still getting notification of the shot getting fired.¡±
SST has done little to address the implications of a private entity like SCAD purchasing security equipment that could potentially monitor people outside of or in between its physical domains. According to Journey, the company¡¯s policy is to let each school decide for itself whether to publicize the installation of ShotSpotter.
Another potential issue for campuses lies in a cost-reward analysis. As Stanley pointed out: ¡°Every dollar spent on [ShotSpotter] is a dollar taken away from much-needed children¡¯s education. I have three children and if this was being put in their school, I would question whether this was a good use of limited resources.¡±
But it¡¯s unclear how much ShotSpotter will cost schools. A recent CBS report put the price tag at $15,000 installation fees and annual monitoring costs, but Journey said the cost will vary, adding: ¡°It will only be a fraction of the cost of the fire alarm system, which every school has.¡±
The price must of course be weighed with the reality of gun violence in America. Though campuses are among the safest places in the country, from 2000 to 2013 there have still been a reported 27 school shootings, resulting in 57 deaths, according to FBI data.
Buckowitch maintains that gun violence in the Savannah area did not factor into his decision to install ShotSpotter. ¡°The decision to go toward ShotSpotter wasn¡¯t based on one particular incident, it wasn¡¯t based on crime in Savannah ? it was completely based on how to use technology to make our campus safer.¡±
Given SecureCampus¡¯s planned expansion, the question of whether it¡¯s worthwhile for these gunshot detection devices and their attendant costs to become as commonplace as fire alarms will only grow in urgency. ¡°We don¡¯t want children feeling that there¡¯s microphones surrounding them,¡± says Stanley. ¡°We don¡¯t want our children growing up in an atmosphere of pervasive surveillance.¡±
A 24-year-old man has died after being shot in the head in a suspected ambush outside a takeaway, police have said.
Officers were called to reports of shots fired in Fulham, south-west London, at about 9.30pm on Monday.
Metropolitan police officers and members of the ambulance service found the man in the front passenger seat of his parked Renault Captur with a gunshot wound to the head. He was pronounced dead at the scene in Walham Grove.
Detectives believe that the victim, who was with a friend, had stopped to buy something to eat at a fast-food restaurant and was shot as he was getting into his car by someone thought to have been lying in wait.
DCI Noel McHugh, who is leading the investigation, said: ¡°North End Road and Walham Grove would have been busy at that time of night. I would like to hear from anyone who may have seen or heard something that could help us catch the person responsible for this murder.
¡°It would appear that the murderer had been waiting in the street in Walham Grove for a while for the friends to return to their car. Did you see someone hanging around in the area from about 8.30pm up until the time of the murder?
¡°At this stage in our investigation, we are keeping an open mind regarding motive and will be trying to establish the victim¡¯s precise movements in the days running up to his murder.¡±
Scotland Yard said the identity of the victim was known and his next of kin had been informed. A postmortem and formal identification have yet to take place.
No arrests have been made and police are appealing for witnesses.
It would seem an immensely improbable thing that someone could survive a gunshot wound to the head. But many people do survive, and a lot of what doctors know about how to deal with damage to the brain has come from working on people who have survived this sort of injury.
The bullet that the gunman fired into Gabrielle Giffords's head on Saturday entered the back of her skull on the left hand side and exited at the front. She remains in a critical condition but was able to follow simple commands before surgery, such as holding up two fingers when asked and wiggling her toes.
"If [the bullet] had gone lower down into the brain and damaged the areas that affect respiration, then she would have died immediately," said Tipu Aziz, a neurosurgeon at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford. "I understand that, since she is obeying commands even before surgery, the bullet didn't traverse that area of the brain."
In the initial surgical procedure after the shooting, doctors removed gunshot debris and a portion of her skull, to relieve the pressure on the brain as it swells in response to the trauma. "The major reasons for fatalities are really to do with the fact that the brain lives inside a confined box called the skull and, if pressure increases within that confined box, that's what's going to really lead to death," said Masud Husain, a clinical neurologist at the National Hospital for Neurology & Neurosurgery in London.
The main cause of death at the scene of a gunshot wound is usually blood loss ? if a bullet goes through important blood vessels and there is not enough time to stop the resulting bleeding, for example.
If the victim survives the initial blood loss, the problem then becomes the increasing pressure inside the skull. "The blood supply to the brain reduces but also the blood which is coming out of the vessels causes pressure within this confined space of the skull," said Husain. "And, if the bullet itself goes through the brain structure, there is a massive inflammatory reaction, so you get a lot of swelling in the brain and that's another big cause for death."
According to reports from the doctors treating Giffords, the bullet did not cross the centre of the brain from the left to the right hemispheres. Major blood vessels cross the centre of the brain and are therefore likely to have been spared damage.
For the next few days, doctors will monitor the pressure in her skull and look for any other potential sources of increasing pressure. "The experience of intensive care is that things can suddenly take a turn for the worse without any warning. I would say that you'd have to wait at least a week before you're starting to become confident about the future. And that doesn't take into account the cognitive future. So far, we're just talking about survival."
The left hemisphere in most people is responsible for language, cognition and abstract thought. The back portion also contains the occipital lobe, where visual information is processed for the right-hand field of view. Any of these functions could be affected in the long term but doctors will not be able to assess these problems for several more weeks.
"Cognitive testing requires someone to be alert enough," said Husain. "It is unrealistic to talk about cognitive future either from looking at scans or seeing whether she can move her foot. I'd be far more guarded about that."
A Fort Worth, Texas man has died of complications from a gunshot wound he suffered over a gambling pot 35 years ago.
According to the Associated Press, Craig Buford, 54, died December 29 of a ruptured colon. The cause of the organ failure: the gunshot wound he thought had healed. The Tarrant County medical examiner's office ruled the death a homicide, and now police are combing through old records looking for clues.
"He never had any serious health problems, so I was a little surprised to hear all this homicide business after all these years," his wife, Carolyn Buford, told the Fort Worth Star-Telegram in Tuesday editions.
The medical examiner can rule the death any way he or she sees fit. But I see this as a philosophical problem on the nature of causation, and one not resolved by a legal ruling from a public official trained in medicine. If he lived another fitful 35 years after the shooting, can it really be said to have killed him?
Armed police were called to Oxford Street in London after panicked shoppers thought they heard gunshots on one of the busiest shopping days of the year.
One woman was hurt in a fall and a large window was broken at the House of Fraser department store after bargain hunters rushed outside. The Metropolitan police said there was no evidence of any gunshots.
It comes a month after nervous shoppers fled the Oxford Circus shopping area after reports of gunfire during the Black Friday sales, which also turned out to be a false alarm.
Tweeters reported ¡°panic on Oxford Street as ¡®hundreds run and scream¡¯ after reports of an incident¡± .
@ashutosmisra tweeted a picture of panic shoppers outside the store:
Police said: ¡°Local officers and armed officers are on scene in Oxford Street, W1. They responded to reports of shots heard. Nothing to indicate shots fired. One woman with non-life-threatening injuries as a result of a fall.¡±
Shoppers also fled the Westfield Stratford City shopping mall after a brawl broke out.
Police dispersed the groups that were causing the disturbance and a man was arrested on suspicion of possession of an offensive weapon, a police spokesman said.
An Australian federal police officer has died after sustaining a gunshot wound at the force¡¯s Melbourne headquarters.
The woman was taken to Royal Melbourne hospital in a critical condition just after 6pm on Monday and died shortly afterwards, the AFP commissioner, Andrew Colvin, said in a statement early on Tuesday.
¡°Our colleague¡¯s death is not believed to be suspicious,¡± Colvin said. Victoria police would investigate and prepare a report for the coroner, he said.
¡°My thoughts are with her loved ones and the broader AFP family who are dealing with the loss of one of our own,¡± Colvin said.
He said the AFP would not be commenting further ¡°out of respect to the family¡±.
A young black man killed by San Francisco police had 20 gunshot wounds, including six in the back, according to an autopsy report released on Thursday.
The San Francisco coroner¡¯s report showed that Mario Woods, 26, also had drugs in his system when he died in the shooting that sparked protests and calls for the police chief¡¯s removal.
Woods had two gunshot wounds in his buttocks and others to his head, legs, abdomen and hands. Some of the wounds could have been from the same bullet, the autopsy said.
It also showed that Woods had used methamphetamine, marijuana, antidepressants and cough medicine before he was shot.Investigators have said five officers opened fire on the knife-wielding Woods on 2 December and that 27 shell casings were recovered at the scene where he died.
Police had encountered him while searching for an assailant who stabbed a stranger earlier in the day.
Police say Woods ignored commands to drop the knife and resisted even after he was shot several times by a ¡°bean-bag¡± gun and pepper-sprayed.
The shooting was captured on video and circulated widely online, igniting ongoing protests over police tactics. A group of Beyonce¡¯s backup dancers created a political firestorm when they were photographed at the Super Bowl last weekend, dressed in Black Panther-inspired costumes, holding a sign that read ¡°Justice 4 Mario Woods¡±.
The department, district attorney and police commission have each launched an investigation.
¡°It is difficult for anyone to watch videos of the shooting. Similarly, it is equally as difficult to read the medical examiner¡¯s report,¡± the San Francisco police department said in a prepared statement.
It said the agency was ¡°committed to a thorough review of the shooting, and this report will be an important component of all three ongoing independent investigations¡±.
Chief Greg Suhr says he will not resign as a result of the shooting, and Mayor Ed Lee says he will not fire him.
Suhr and the mayor called on the US Department of Justice to review department policy and procedures and advise the city on reforms. The DoJ said last week it would conduct the review.
Woods¡¯s family has filed a legal claim against the police and the city, arguing that officers did not have to open fire.
The family¡¯s attorney, John Burris, told the Guardian that the autopsy report confirmed his view that the shooting was unlawful, comparing it to the Chicago police killing of Laquan McDonald.
¡°It¡¯s unconscionable that a person can be shot that many times in the back,¡± Burris said. ¡°When you shoot someone in the back, that means he¡¯s not threatening you.¡±
The Mexican side Guadalajara fined two players for a goal celebration in which one pretended to shoot the other in the head, sparking outrage in the country where drugs-related violence has claimed 44,000 lives
Malala Yousafzai, the Pakistani schoolgirl shot in the head by the Taliban because she campaigned for the right to be educated, arrived in the UK on Monday to be cared for at Birmingham's Queen Elizabeth hospital.
"Doctors ... believe she has a chance of making a good recovery on every level," said Dr Dave Rosser, the hospital's medical director, adding her treatment and rehabilitation could take months. He told reporters she had not yet been assessed by British medics but said she would not have been brought to the UK at all if her chances recovery were not good.
Six days after a gunman clambered into the back of a van full of her classmates and shot her from point blank range, the 14-year-old landed at Birmingham airport after flying by on a special air ambulance from Pakistan. Malala travelled to the UK on her own, but her family may follow later.
The Queen Elizabeth hospital is also home to the Royal Centre for Defence Medicine, the primary receiving unit for military casualties returned from overseas.
"Malala's bravery in standing up for the right of all young girls in Pakistan to an education is an example to us all," said the foreign secretary, William Hague.
A spokesman for Pakistan's military said the girl would require "prolonged care to fully recover from the physical and psychological effects of the trauma that she has received". That is likely to include the partial rebuilding of her skull and "intensive neuro-rehabilitation".
While in the UK she will also be safe from the Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), the militant group that has claimed responsibility for shooting her and which has vowed to try and kill her again if she recovers. The attempted murder of the young peace activist sparked worldwide condemnation and sent shockwaves through Pakistani society.
Politicians have been forced to make strong public stands against the TTP, tens of thousands of demonstrators have taken to the streets and journalists daring to reflect the public mood have been warned of planned reprisals by militants.
Efforts to save the life of a young girl who rose to prominence in 2009 after writing a BBC blog describing the terror of living under Taliban insurgency in Pakistan's Swat valley have already seen her shuttled between hospitals. She was initially airlifted from Swat to Peshawar, where surgeons spent three hours removing a bullet that had become lodged near her spinal cord.
Her injury was not instantly fatal because she ducked just before the gunman fired, apparently ensuring the bullet missed much of her brain. She was later moved to a hospital in Rawalpindi, the garrison town close to the Pakistani capital.
Although she has been unconscious throughout her ordeal, relying on a ventilator to breathe, she has received bedside visits from some of the most powerful people in the land, including the prime minister and the army chief. The military has described her recovery as satisfactory and said she was able to move her legs and hands several days ago when her sedatives were reduced. It has not said whether she suffered any brain damage or other permanent trauma.
Offers of assistance have poured in from across the world, including from paediatric surgeons at Johns Hopkins University's school of medicine in Baltimore, in the US. However, it was decided on Sunday that she should be moved to the Queen Elizabeth hospital in Birmingham.
Moazzam Khan, spokesman for the Pakistani ministry of foreign affairs, said the decision not to accept the US offer of help had been taken by her doctors for purely medical reasons. "Several other countries had also offered treatment, and the US was among them," he said. "But due to the conditions of the patient and keeping in view the distance and the hours of travelling Britain was preferred."
The Queen Elizabeth is one of Britain's 16 major trauma centres specialising in treating severe gunshot wounds and major head injuries. The Foreign Office said the Islamabad government is bearing the costs of transportation and treatment.
Gordon Brown, the UN special envoy for global education, launched an I am Malala petition on Monday. "Today, sadly, 32 million girls are not going to school, and it is time to fight harder for Malala's dream to come true," he said. He added he would hand the petition to Asif Ali Zardari when he visited the Pakistani president next month and that it would also be given to the UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon.
Police have arrested at least three suspects in connection with the attack but the two gunmen who carried out the shooting remain at large.
The biggest rally yet showing solidarity with Malala was held in Karachi on Sunday with an estimated 10,000 people. Although some politicians have been criticised for not specifically naming the TTP in their otherwise damning statements about the incident, many analysts have been impressed by the resolve of Pakistan's leaders.
Last week, General Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, the powerful army chief, released a statement in which he called Yousafzai an "icon of courage and hope" and vowed to fight against terror "regardless of the cost". There has even been speculation that the current mood of national outrage may lead to military operations to try and clear militants out of North Waziristan, an area near the border of Afghanistan where the US has long demanded action.
On Monday however, Rehman Malik, the country's interior minister, said there were no such plans currently.
A novice of the Fellow Craft Club - an elite within the lodge - would sit while an older member fired a handgun loaded with blanks at him from 20 ft away, while another beat a rubbish bin like a drum. On Monday night something went horribly wrong.
Albert Eid, 76, had a .22 with blanks in his left pocket; in his right was a .32 with live ammunition. In a distracted moment, he reached for his right pocket and shot dead William James, 47.
Mr Eid was was released on $2,500 (¡Ì1,400) bail after appearing in court this week wearing a blue Masonic jacket to plead not guilty to second-degree manslaughter. Police accept that the shooting was accidental, but other masons rushed to disassociate themselves from the ritual. "It's mindboggling," the New York State Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons told the New York Times. "I've never heard of anything like this."
Mr Eid had been a lodge member more than 30 years. "He's always there," said Michael Paquette, who joined five years ago. For his initiation, Mr Paquette was given two loaded mousetraps and told one worked and one did not. Another member touched the first, and it did not snap. Mr Paquette was told to touch the second. He did, and found it was broken too. "It was just for you to realise you were in good hands, and didn't have anything to fear," he said.
Lykke Li's third album was an onslaught of emotion; a barrage of broken hearted ballads backed by spacious, sweeping production. "Every track on I Never Learn is a massive torch song," wrote Kitty Empire in her review for the Observer. "This is heartbreak squared, romantic pain for breakfast, lunch and afters."
So, if you can stomach it, we have the video premiere for Gunshot, which features some of the singer's most savage sentiments to date. The lyrics - "I¡¯m longing for your poison like a cancer for its prey, I shot an arrow in your heart where you waited in the rain" - in particular, were words that entered her psyche after partaking that commonly aggressive pastime of meditation, according to the singer.
"I wrote Gunshot straight after a meditation I had and the words just came out kind of violent words. So this is also the moment in, in a relationship where you¡¯ve fucked up and some things you can never take back," Lykke Li says of the song. "I think that a lot of people can relate to that moment where it¡¯s just gone forever."
Filmed in Paris and directed by Fleur and Manu, watch the video for Gunshot below.
A 19-year-old remains in a critical condition in hospital after he held a loaded revolver to his head and pulled the trigger in a game of Russian roulette.
Police have been told Sydney teenager Josh Taylor was sitting in a car with his friends outside the IGA supermarket in Pitt Town in Sydney¡¯s north-west on Friday night when he shot himself.
¡°We are aware a 19-year-old male received a serious gunshot wound to the head after reports he was ¡¦ playing Russian roulette with a loaded revolver,¡± Detective Inspector Garry Sims told reporters.
The Smith & Wesson firearm discharged in the side of Taylor¡¯s head above his ear.
He was taken to hospital where he remains in a critical but stable condition. The gun is being examined by experts.
Taylor¡¯s mother posted on Facebook at the weekend: ¡°Come on son ¡¦ please please fight like you always have ¡¦ no words can explain how desperate we are for you to just hang on and fight.¡±
There was no evidence that anyone else in the car was involved in the game apart from Taylor, Sims said.
Oscar Pistorius fired a gun in a crowded restaurant, and told a friend to take the blame because of the "media hype" surrounding him, a month before he shot his girlfriend, a court heard on Wednesday.
The testimony from a friend of the accused came as the prosecution in South Africa's high-profile murder trial opened a new line of attack, apparently seeking to portray Pistorius as irresponsible and trigger happy.
Kevin Lerena, a professional boxer who calls himself the KO Kid, said the incident happened at lunchtime on 11 January 2013 when he was with Pistorius and two friends, Darren Fresco and the British sprinter Martyn Rooney, at a restaurant in the upmarket Melrose Arch area of Johannesburg.
Fresco passed his gun to Pistorius under the table and told him there was a bullet in the chamber, Lerena said.
"A shot went off in the restaurant, then there was just complete silence," the 21-year-old continued. "Once the shot went off, I was shocked. I looked down, and just where my foot was stationary there was a hole in the floor. I had a little graze on my toe. I wasn't hurt or injured."
He added that there was blood and "there could have been a fatality", but he did not require medical attention.
"I didn't expect it, I didn't understand it. Oscar said, 'is everything OK? I apologise. I don't know how the gun went off'."
Before the restaurant management approached the table, Lerena continued, Pistorius asked Fresco to say he was responsible for the shot. "Oscar said to Darren, 'just say it was you. I don't want any tension around me. Just say it was you. Please take the blame for me, there's too much media hype around me'. And Darren took the blame for him."
Lerena added: "When Mr Fresco spoke to the restaurant owners, he did say the gun was caught on my [Fresco's] pants, to take the rap for Oscar."
Lerena said they paid the bill and left the restaurant, and he never spoke about the incident. But, he said, two days after Pistorius shot his girlfriend, Reeva Steenkamp, he woke to find more than 100 missed calls on his phone as media from around the world tried to contact him to ask about the restaurant accident.
Jason Loupis, owner of the Tashas restaurant, also took the witness stand. He said the restaurant was packed with about 200 people that day. "I heard a loud bang. It sounded like a gun but I hoped not. I hoped it was a balloon."
He walked over to Pistorius' table and asked what had happened. "They all looked at me ¡¦ Mr Fresco then said, 'sorry Jason, my gun fell out of my tracksuit pants'. I said, 'are you being serious? This is not a joke'," Loupis recalled.
Loupis's wife, Maria, said: "Darren spoke to me and told me the gun fell out of his pants, his tracksuit pants ¡¦ I said to him 'what's the first rule of owning a gun? Safety first?' He said 'yes', and I hit him over the head."
Pistorius paid the bill and the group left, she added. She also agreed that the shot went off near to where a child was sitting, although the defence countered that a wall was between them.
The incident at Tashas is one of three additional charges Pistorius, 27, faces at the Pretoria trial. He is also charged with firing a gun through a moving car's sunroof, and with illegal possession of ammunition.
The state is expected to use these incidents to illustrate a pattern of reckless behaviour in their argument to prove the "blade runner" deliberately gunned down 29-year-old Steenkamp on Valentine's day last year. Pistorius denies the charges.
Earlier on Wednesday, the defence counsel, Barry Roux, sought to undermine the prosecution testimony of a couple who live near Pistorius's luxury home.
Charl Johnson, and his wife Michelle Burger, have testified to hearing a woman screaming, a man shouting for help and then gunshots.
During his cross-examination of Johnson, Roux said phone call records would show that Pistorius called an estate manager at about 3.19am, soon after he used a cricket bat to break down the door of the toilet where Steenkamp died.
Johnson and Burger's testimony says they heard what they called shots straight after making a call to security at 3.16am. The similar times show the sounds were that of the bat hitting the door, Roux argued.
"There is only one thing you could have heard, because it coincides precisely," Roux said to Johnson. "That was the time that he [Pistorius] broke down the door [with the bat]."
Johnson replied, addressing the judge: "My lady, I am convinced the sound I heard was gunshots."
Johnson also said that after Roux had revealed his mobile phone number in court on Tuesday he had received large numbers of calls and text messages, including a threat which said: "Why are you lying in court? You know Oscar didn't kill Reeva. It's not cool."
In court were members of the ANC women's league, and the Gauteng province premier, Nomvula Mokonyane. They said they wanted to highlight the issue of gender-based violence in South Africa. "Every child is my child and [Reeva] is my child. So we will be on the side of Reeva's mother," Mokonyane said.
Khalid Masood, who killed four people in a terrorist attack in Westminster, died of a gunshot wound to the chest, an inquest has heard.
Opening and adjourning the inquest into Masood¡¯s death, Westminster coroner Dr Fiona Wilcox was told the attacker was identified through fingerprints and DNA.
Masood, also known as Adrian Elms and Adrian Ajao, killed three people when he drove his 4x4 Hyundai Tucson along the pavement of Westminster Bridge before stabbing to death his fourth victim, PC Keith Palmer, an unarmed member of the parliamentary and diplomatic protection command unit who was guarding an entrance to the Houses of Parliament.
More than 35 people were injured in the attack, with wounds ranging from cuts and bruises to extensive bone and skull fractures. One person remains in a coma with extensive injuries.The inquest into Masood¡¯s death was opened and adjourned until a pre-inquest review on 19 May at the Royal Courts of Justice.
The senior investigating officer, Det Supt John Crossley, told the hearing: ¡°Masood was challenged by armed police and shot. He was taken to St Mary¡¯s hospital by ambulance. He was pronounced dead at 15:35 on 22 March.¡±
Crossley said there were in excess of 1,500 potential witnesses, of whom at least 140 were considered significant.
Inquests into the victims¡¯ deaths opened and adjourned on Wednesday. Palmer¡¯s cause of death was given as haemorrhage and a stab wound to the chest, the inquest heard.
American tourist Kurt Cochran, 54, and teacher Aysha Frade, 44, died at the scene on the bridge after being struck by the car. Cochran died of multiple injuries and Frade died of head and chest injuries, the inquest heard.
Leslie Rhodes, 75, was taken to King¡¯s College hospital but the retired window cleaner died three days later of a head injury.
A 30-year-old man remains in custody in relation to the incident and a 32-year-old was released on bail. Ten other people were arrested and released without further action, including Masood¡¯s partner, Rohey Hydara.
Police have said they are not looking for anyone in connection with the deaths of a man and a woman who are believed to have died from gunshot wounds on a housing estate in Norfolk.
The body of the woman, believed to be in her early 40s, was discovered on Sunday afternoon in the front garden of a property in Compit Hills, Roughton, near Cromer.
The body of the man, believed to be in his late 50s, was found in a rear garden nearby.
Norfolk Constabulary said that officers found the two bodes after being called to the estate amid fears for the safety of a resident.
Detective Superintendent Peter Hornby, who is leading the inquiry into their deaths, said: "While I understand this is a very shocking incident for the neighbours of the two people involved, I can reassure them that, at this stage, we are not looking for anyone else in connection with it."
An armed officer from an elite Metropolitan police protection unit has been found shot dead, the force has said.
The man was a member of the specialist protection command, a unit whose duties involve guarding past and present prime ministers, their senior cabinet colleagues and foreign dignitaries.
The Metropolitan police said the 43-year-old police constable was found with a gunshot wound on Tuesday at a residential address in Camden, north London.
As part of his duties, he would have been armed with a police issue weapon, and the Met said an investigation into the death would examine whether the firearm used was one issued by the force.
A Met spokesperson said the officer was from a unit separate to the diplomatic protection group, which guards Downing Street and was caught up in the Andrew Mitchell "Plebgate" saga.
The Met declined to say what protection duties the officer had undertaken but said the officer was not under investigation or facing any disciplinary action and that the death was not thought to be the result of a crime. The officer's family have been informed.
Officers went to the address on Tuesday afternoon after neighbours raised concerns about the occupant, the Met said.
"At 16:06hrs on Tuesday 19 February 2013, police went to a residential address in Camden, NW1, following concerns about the occupant. Officers forced entry to the property in King's Terrace and found the body of a man with a gunshot injury,", the Met said.
The Independent Police Complaints Commission has been informed but the investigation will be conducted by the Met's own directorate of professional standards. The Met added: "The death is not being treated as suspicious at this stage ... The investigation will look at whether an MPS firearm was involved."
An inquest has been opened and adjourned.
Officers who volunteer to carry firearms are vetted to see if they are suitable.
A new father has died from gunshot wounds in north Belfast, the Police Service of Northern Ireland has confirmed.
Michael McGibbon, 33, who was married with a young family, died in hospital overnight after being found wounded in the republican Ardoyne district of the city. He was shot three times in the leg in an alleyway at Butler Place near Elmfield Street at about 10.05pm on Friday, police said.
Officers revealed on Saturday that the victim had refused to leave his home on Thursday evening after two armed and masked men arrived at the house and ordered him to come outside.
The armed men then told McGibbon they would be back, according to PSNI Det Supt John McVea. The senior PSNI officer said the killing ¡°had all the hallmarks of paramilitary murder¡±.
PSNI commander Insp James Murphy said: ¡°We are keen to hear from witnesses or anyone with information regarding this heinous crime.¡±
Sinn Fein¡¯s Gerry Kelly blamed an ¡°armed gang¡± for the murder ? a common euphemism for one of the dissident republican terror groups.
¡°This killing has shocked the local community in north Belfast. This is the second such killing carried out in this area in the last six months by an armed gang which is clearly at war with the local community.,¡± he said.
The centrist Alliance party condemned those behind the killing.
Nuala McAllister, a councillor, said: ¡°There can never be any excuse for carrying out such a heinous act and I utterly condemn the thugs behind it. Thanks to them, there is now a man lying dead and a family plunged into mourning.
¡°Violent attacks and murder have no place in our society. This was a brutal crime and those behind it need taken off our streets. Our entire community must unite against those who seek to drag us back to the bloody days of the past.
¡°I would urge anyone with any information at all to contact police immediately.¡±
Witnesses and police described a chaotic scene as a masked attacker armed with two guns shot seven people, killing one, in a Tennessee church before he was subdued.
Burnette Chapel Church of Christ member Minerva Rosa said members were talking about the success of their yard sale the previous day when they heard gunshots outside. The church pastor, David Spann, 60, shouted, ¡°Run, run, gunshots!¡± as congregants hid under pews or in bathrooms, according to a witness.
A masked gunman carrying two guns entered the church from the back after fatally shooting a woman outside, police said. He then walked through the church silently, shooting six more people before he was subdued by an usher, police said. Police later recovered another pistol and a shotgun from the suspect¡¯s vehicle.
Rosa said the reading that day had been from Luke, chapter 8, and she recalled the part about a woman who touched Jesus and was cured of bleeding. By the end of the shooting, she was on her knees, her dress stained with blood, putting pressure on the gunshot wound in Pastor Spann¡¯s chest. She and others got on their phones to call 911.
Another church member, a 22-year-old usher named Robert Engle, tackled the gunman and suffered injuries when he was pistol whipped. In the struggle, the shooter shot himself, although it wasn¡¯t clear if it was on purpose or an accident. Engle retrieved his own gun from his car and held the man until police arrived, police said.
¡°He¡¯s amazing,¡± Rosa told reporters about Engle. ¡°Without him I think it could be worse. He was the hero today.¡±
Authorities identified the attacker as Emanuel Kidega Samson, 25, of Murfreesboro, who came to the US from Sudan in 1996 and is a legal US resident.
No motive was immediately determined. Church members told investigators the suspect had attended services a year or two ago, said Don Aaron, a spokesman for the Metro Nashville police department. Nashville police did not immediately comment on several bizarre posts on the suspect¡¯s Facebook page in the hours before the shooting.
The gunman pulled into the church¡¯s parking lot as services were ending. Melanie Smith, 39, of Smyrna, Tennessee, was killed when the shooter opened fire in the parking lot. Spann¡¯s wife, Peggy, 65, was also shot as well as William and Marlene Jenkins, 83 and 84 respectively, Linda Bush, 68, and Katherine Dickerson, 64. Police said none of the surviving victims suffered life-threatening injuries.
Aaron called Engle ¡°an extraordinarily brave individual¡±. But in a statement Engle said he did not want to be labeled a hero.
¡°The real heroes are the police, first responders and medical staff and doctors who have helped me and everyone affected.¡± Engle asked for prayers for all those injured as well as the shooter.
Blake Langford, 21, got a text from his father telling him not to come to the church where his family attended after the shooting. ¡°My grandmother hid under a church pew. My stepmom and my aunt, they barricaded themselves in the bathroom,¡± Langford said he learned from his father, who arrived at the church seconds after the shooting ended.
Langford said he knew Engle and believed his actions saved lives. ¡°He¡¯s 6ft 5in, a really big guy, but a gentle giant,¡± Langford said. ¡°He¡¯s always been that kind of person to put others before himself.¡±
Forty-two people were at the church at the time of the shooting, Aaron said. The church describes itself on its website as a ¡°friendly, Bible-based group of folks who love the Lord and are interested in spreading his word to those who are lost¡±. Photos on the church¡¯s Facebook page show a diverse congregation with people of various ages and ethnicities.
On Samson¡¯s Facebook page, a post in the hours before the shooting read: ¡°Everything you¡¯ve ever doubted or made to be believe as false, is real. & vice versa, B.¡± Another post read: ¡°Become the creator instead of what¡¯s created. Whatever you say, goes.¡± A third post read: ¡°You are more than what they told us.¡±
Police charged Samson on Sunday night with one count of murder and said multiple charges were pending. He was ordered held without bond by a judicial commissioner.
After the attack, the nearby New Beautiful Gate Church opened its doors to Burnette Chapel churchgoers as they reunited with loved ones. New Beautiful Gate pastor Michael Mosby said he was neighbors with Spann.
¡°As a pastor myself, you come with the expectation of sitting down and having a service and not thinking about what can happen around you,¡± Mosby said. ¡°You never know who is going to come to the door or what reasons they would come to the door, come to your church and do something like that. We¡¯re always on guard. We just thank God many more weren¡¯t hurt.¡±
A man has been shot dead by police in what Scotland Yard is describing as ¡°an intelligence-led operation¡± in Wood Green, north London. Witness Nick Lindsay says he was ¡°told to get down by police¡± after he heard a smash and then a gunshot. The Metropolitan police posted on Twitter saying the operation was not related to terrorism
More than 100,000 people are shot each year in the US at a total cost of $2.8bn in hospital charges, a study published on Monday has found. If lost wages and hospital charges are considered together, the authors said, the annual cost of shootings in the US could be as high as $45bn.
The study was published in the journal Health Affairs, hours after the deadliest mass shooting in American history, at a music festival in Las Vegas on Sunday. At least 58 people were killed and 515 wounded.
Although mass shootings represent the most high-profile gun violence in the US, homicide, suicide and everyday violence kill many more. The study, which looked at more than 150,000 patients in a national database of emergency department visits between 2006 and 2014, is one of just a handful on American gun violence published each year, because of a lack of congressional funding.
¡°The numbers are really, really startling,¡± said Faiz Gani, one of the authors of the study and a postdoctoral research fellow at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine department of surgery. ¡°Previous studies just focused on the mortality, but ignored the larger chunk of people who don¡¯t die but are affected by this issue.
¡°That really struck me as something that was really alarming. There are 100,000 people who are affected and we¡¯re not really doing anything.¡±
In 2015, about 36,500 people died of firearms-related injuries. When that total was added to those injured, Gani and his co-authors found more than 100,000 people each year were shot, either as part of an assault, accidentally or while attempting to kill themselves.
Dr Thomas Weiser, a trauma surgeon and associate professor at Stanford Medicine, called the mass shooting in Las Vegas ¡°totally shocking, incredibly tragic and totally expected¡±. Recent research by Weiser estimated that victims of firearms injuries cost $700m in hospitalizations between 2006 and 2014.
¡°It¡¯s just a matter of time before this happens again,¡± said Weiser. ¡°The truth is these tragedies ? these mass shootings ? attract tremendous headlines. The other truth is there is daily carnage throughout the United States in ones, twos and threes that don¡¯t make headlines.¡±
Patients pay a high price for being shot. On average, those treated in emergency departments incurred $5,254 in charges. If they stayed in hospital overnight, charges were far higher ? $95,887 on average.
Patients who stayed overnight in hospital were more likely to be discharged to expensive rehabilitation facilities. About a third of inpatient gunshot victims were discharged to another medical facility and incurred costs of $179,565 on average.
Over the course of the study, 2006 to 2014, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimated 970,622 people in the US were wounded or killed by a firearm.
¡°A lot of these individuals tend to be from a lower socioeconomic background and tend to be uninsured,¡± Gani said. ¡°They¡¯re paying that out of pocket directly.¡±
Firearms injuries are the third-leading injury-related cause of death in the US, behind drug overdoses and car crashes. Nevertheless, research on the causes and consequences of gun violence remains severely underfunded because of the ¡°politicized environment¡± around guns and gun sales.
One of the co-authors of the new research, Dr Joseph Sakran, is a professor and trauma surgeon at Johns Hopkins, and was a shooting victim. When Sakran was 17, he was shot in the throat after a high school football game and nearly died, he said, an experience that inspired him to pursue medicine as a career.
¡°I love what I do, and I love being able to take care of patients, but what I would love more is to not ever have to take care of such unnecessary violent crimes,¡± said Sakran. ¡°This is a public health crisis we¡¯re facing here in the US.¡±
As many people die from gunshots every year as from sepsis. However, gun violence research receives only 0.7% of the funding given to research into sepsis. For every 100 studies published on sepsis, four are published on gun violence.
The study was conducted by researchers based at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, a city that is experiencing one of the worst waves of gun-related homicide in its history. In late spring, the city¡¯s mayor said ¡°murder is out of control¡± and that there were ¡°too many guns on the streets¡±.
The study reflected that reality. Nearly half (49.5%) patients who arrived at the emergency department after being shot were victims of assault, accounting for 348,000 patients.
Men between 15 and 24 had the highest incidences of gun wounds and were nine times more likely to be injured by guns than women.
¡°There¡¯s a lot of violent crime,¡± Gani said, ¡°and I think really just being a citizen of the city it¡¯s something that is pretty disconcerting, and you want to find a solution, and do something.¡±
In the US, for every 100,000 people, 25.3 will visit an emergency department with a gunshot wound each year ? a rate ¡°disproportionately higher¡± than in other developed countries such as Germany, Japan and the UK.
Some of the best international data compares homicide rates between countries. In the US, 27 people are killed by firearms for every 1 million people. In the UK, that rate is one per 1 million, according to the Geneva-based Small Arms Survey.
¡°Although numerous studies have identified and proposed effective interventions to limit firearm-related violence, efforts to reduce firearm-related injuries have been limited as a result of the politicized environment surrounding gun violence and a lack of will to consistently implement proposed policies,¡± the Johns Hopkins researchers wrote.
The authors suggested that ¡°future policies must promote more effective ways of limiting firearms access¡± for the mentally ill and people with criminal records.
Researchers drew data from the National Emergency Department Database, a record of 30m emergency department visits in 950 hospitals in the US.
A man and woman have been found dead from suspected gunshot wounds at a property in Norfolk.
The bodies were discovered in the village of Magdalen, south of King¡¯s Lynn, on Tuesday morning after East of England ambulance service staff raised the alarm just after midnight on Monday.
The man¡¯s body was in the front garden of the property and the woman¡¯s body was inside. Both are believed to be in their late 40s. Norfolk constabulary said it was a suspected firearms incident.
Det Supt Paul Durham, from the force¡¯s joint major investigation team, said: ¡°We are in the very early stages of the investigation and while I understand how shocking the news of this incident must be for neighbours of the two people involved and other local residents, I can reassure them that we are putting all our efforts into establishing the circumstances surrounding their deaths.¡±
The property has been sealed off while crime scene investigators carry out forensic examinations and the road remains closed.
An East of England ambulance service spokesman said: ¡°We got a call at 12.08am and sent two ambulance crews, a rapid response vehicle and an ambulance officer.
¡°There were two patients but sadly there was nothing that could be done for them and they were declared dead at the scene.¡±
An autopsy on a 19-year-old woman who was killed on a suburban Detroit porch, where she had reportedly gone to seek help after a car crash, has confirmed that she died of a gunshot wound to the face.
Renisha McBride, of Detroit, who was black, was fatally shot on 2 November?in the predominantly white neighbourhood of Dearborn Heights. Civil-rights groups have called for a vigorous prosecution in the case, saying McBride was targeted because of her race.
Prosecutors say they are reviewing whether to charge the 54-year-old owner of the home in question. Wayne County prosecutor's office spokeswoman, Maria Miller, said on Monday that a warrant review process is under way as they await information from Dearborn Heights police.?Police did not return messages seeking comment on Monday.
Investigators have said the homeowner told them he thought someone was trying to break into his home and that he accidentally discharged his shotgun.
The Wayne County Medical Examiner's Office report, released on Monday, ruled McBride's death a homicide. There is no evidence she was shot at close range, according to the report.
The homeowner's attorney, Cheryl Carpenter, told the Detroit News the man was awakened in the early hours by what sounded like "a person or persons" trying to get into his home. Carpenter said the shooting was justified but did not comment on reports that it was accidental.?She said she and her client "recognize it's a tragedy and a 19-year-old woman died".
"Let's wait and not prejudice," Carpenter said. "Nobody including the police, the prosecutor or the public has all the information yet."
Bodyguards rushed Israel's prime minister, Ehud Olmert, and the visiting French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, to safety yesterday after an Israeli police officer shot himself in the head during a departure ceremony at Tel Aviv airport.
Sarkozy and his wife, Carla Bruni, were at the foot of the steps leading up to their aircraft when security guards heard a single gunshot. The two leaders appeared not to have heard anything but Bruni ran up the steps. Sarkozy was directed into the aircraft, and Olmert was rushed to his car, which was parked close by. Israel's president, Shimon Peres, who was also at the ceremony marking the end of Sarkozy's three-day visit, was led away.
Within moments the incident was over, and Olmert boarded the plane himself. Some reports suggested that the officer, from the border police, fell from a building and that his gun fired accidentally. Other accounts suggested he shot himself in the head. The officer was reported to be at least 100 metres from the aircraft.
"This was in no way an assassination attempt," an Israeli police spokesman, Micky Rosenfeld, told Reuters. He said the police officer had killed himself.
The incident came at a time of mounting concern over the ceasefire in Gaza between Israel and the Palestinian Islamist group Hamas. Two Palestinians, including a commander of the Islamic Jihad militant group, were killed during an Israeli military raid in Nablus, in the occupied West Bank, yesterday. Several hours later Islamic Jihad fired four rockets from Gaza towards the southern Israeli town of Sderot, slightly injuring two people.
The rocket fire came on the sixth day of what was supposed to be a ceasefire in Gaza. Hamas said it was sticking to the agreement but it was not clear whether Israel would respond. "It is essential for the ceasefire, for calm to be sustained," said the appointed Palestinian prime minister, Salam Fayyad, in Berlin.
The ceasefire is also threatened by a political crisis within Israel. Olmert faces the possible collapse of his ruling coalition today when politicians vote on a preliminary reading of a bill to dissolve the Knesset, Israel's parliament. The Labour party, a key force in the ruling coalition and led by the defence minister, Ehud Barak, has promised to vote in favour. Barak sees himself as a challenger for the premiership and last month called on Olmert to quit after embarrassing testimony was given in the latest corruption investigation against the prime minister.
Olmert has told members of his Kadima party he will sack Labour ministers who support the bill, including Barak, who is not an MP.
"I won't accept a situation in which Labour ministers are trying to topple the government yet staying in it," Olmert said at a Kadima meeting on Monday.
Early elections would probably see Labour and Kadima lose out to the rightwing Likud party, led by Benjamin Netanyahu.
Dozens of people are feared dead in a fire that started after a gunman burst into a Manila casino and set gaming tables alight.
At least 36 people had died, mostly due to suffocation following the blaze, a spokesman for the Philippines president said. Investigations so far suggested a criminal rather than terrorist intent, he added.
The unidentified lone gunman stormed the casino at Resorts World Manila, a complex of hotels, restaurants, stores and a sprawling multi-floor gambling area, in the early hours of Friday morning. He fled with stolen casino chips worth at least 113m Philippine pesos (¡Ì1.7m, $2.3m), then forced his way into a room in an adjoining hotel and killed himself by dousing himself in gasoline and setting himself alight, police said.
The national police chief, Ronald dela Rosa, said security footage showed the gunman ignoring a guard who tried to question him at the complex¡¯s entrance, then going straight to the casino. He stuffed a backpack with gambling chips, fired an assault rifle at TV screens and set gambling tables on fire by pouring gasoline on to them from a two-litre bottle, Dela Rosa said.
It was not clear how he smuggled the gasoline and rifle into the crowded casino. The bag of high-value gambling chips was found in a toilet.
Dela Rosa described the gunman as white, about 6ft tall and English-speaking.
The Philippines has been on heightened alert amid a crisis in the south of the country, where troops have been battling Islamist rebels since 23 May.
An Islamic State-linked Filipino operative claimed Isis ¡°soldiers¡± were responsible for Friday¡¯s attack, but police maintained that the gunman was acting alone and that no connection had been established with the fighting in the south.
Armed police were deployed at about 2am on Friday (1800 GMT Thursday) after gunfire and loud bangs were heard inside the casino building.
Those who died were in the casino¡¯s main gaming area, said Oscar Albayalde, chief of the capital¡¯s police office. ¡°What caused their deaths is the thick smoke,¡± he told reporters. ¡°The room was carpeted and the tables [were] highly combustible.¡±
Taiwan¡¯s foreign ministry said four Taiwan nationals were among those killed and a South Korean foreign ministry official said one South Korean had died, apparently after a heart attack. At least 54 people were hurt, some seriously, as they rushed to escape, officials said.
¡°I heard many, many gunshots,¡± Julio Silva, a witness who managed to dash out of the complex, told DZMM radio.A spokesman for the nearby Ninoy Aquino airport told the Guardian: ¡°Terminal 3 has been locked down because it is near the Resort World. We still don¡¯t know how this will affect flights.¡± Terminal 3 manages international and domestic flights.
The Philippines¡¯ armed forces have been fighting a militant faction sympathetic to Islamic State in the country¡¯s south. A fierce 10-day battle has been raging in the city of Marawi, about 500 miles (800km) south of Manila, and, last week, the Philippine president Rodrigo Duterte imposed martial law across the southern region of Mindanao, arguing that the measure was necessary to crush a rising threat posed by Isis-linked rebels.
In Marawi, the army has deployed helicopter gunships and artillery fire to try to dislodge the gunmen, but they have held a large section of the city.
Over the past week, security forces have been deployed to other cities in Mindanao province, concerned that the militants may attempt to launch attacks outside Marawi.
The clashes started after security forces tried to capture Isnilon Hapilon, an Islamist militant leader who is the subject of a $5m (¡Ì3.88m) reward offered by the FBI and endorsed by Isis.
Hapilon is believed to be a senior leader in a coalition of insurgent groups in the Philippines, although their operational links with Islamic State in the Middle East remain unclear. The clashes there have left at least 171 people dead and Duterte said last week he may need to declare martial law across the rest of the country if the threat spreads.
He has said he fears that the ¡°terrible ideology¡± of Isis will spread on Mindanao, an island of 22 million people, and has warned that it could become a haven for supporters fleeing Iraq and Syria.
The US president, Donald Trump, passed on the thoughts and prayers of the American people to those affected by the incident. Speaking in the White House Rose Garden, Trump said: ¡°It is really very sad as to what¡¯s going on throughout the world with terror.¡± He added that he was ¡°closely monitoring the situation¡± and would continue to provide updates.
Associated Press contributed to this report
Eyewitness video captured by tourist Aaron Tsang shows people running away from the Houses of Parliament and then the sound of gunshots can be heard. A police officer was reportedly stabbed and the alleged assailant shot by armed police following an incident at Westminster.
Eight people have been killed and more than a dozen injured after a man drove a truck nearly a mile down a bike path in lower Manhattan on Tuesday, striking pedestrians, cyclists and a school bus.
New York City¡¯s mayor, Bill de Blasio, said the incident was being treated as ¡°a particularly cowardly act of terror¡±. He said a police officer assigned to the area stopped the attacker by shooting him in the stomach.
After smashing into the school bus, injuring two adults and two children, the 29-year-old suspect exited the truck displaying ¡°imitation firearms¡±. Witnesses have said the suspect was shouting ¡°Allahu Akbar¡±, Arabic for ¡°God is great¡±, before he was shot by police, according to the New York police department (NYPD). The suspect was arrested, and a paintball gun and a pellet gun were recovered at the scene.
The suspect underwent surgery and was in critical condition but was expected to survive. Officials who weren¡¯t authorised to discuss the investigation and spoke on the condition of anonymity identified the attacker as 29-year-old Sayfullo Saipov, an Uzbek citizen who came to the US legally in 2010. Saipov has a Florida driving licence but may have been living in New Jersey, reports said.
Uber said Saipov was one of its drivers who had passed a background check and had been actively driving for the ride-hailing app for more than six months.
Police said the truck drove south after entering a pedestrian and bicycle path along the Hudson river on the south-west side of Manhattan, where it struck a number of people, coming to a stop near Stuyvesant High school, not far from the One World Trade Center site and Rockefeller Park.
Six men were pronounced dead at the scene on the cycle lane and two other people were dead on arrival at hospital.
¡°It is a very painful day in our city,¡± De Blasio said.
The victims include a Belgian citizen and five Argentinians. The five men from Argentina ? Hernan Diego Mendoza, Diego Enrique Angelini, Alejandro Damian Pagnucco, Ariel Erlij and Hernan Ferruchi ? were part of a group of school friends who travelled to New York to celebrate the 30th anniversary of their graduation. Another member of the group, Martin Ludovico Marro, remained in hospital.
The justice department said in a statement that a joint terrorism task force that included the FBI, the NYPD and others was investigating the attack.
There have been multiple ? and conflicting ? reports of a note and/or flag showing support for Isis had been found in the truck used in the attack. The reports have not been officially confirmed.
The New York Times reported that ¡°handwritten notes in Arabic near the truck ¡¦ indicated allegiance to the Islamic State¡±, while CNN said a note was written in English, also indicating support for Isis, and was found inside the truck. Others including the Daily Mail claimed an Isis flag was found in the truck.
A woman from Cincinnati, Ohio, contacted by the Guardian, who identified herself as Dilfuza Iskhakova, said Saipov had stayed at her home for several months about six years ago, after arriving in the US from Uzbekistan. ¡°He seemed like a nice guy, but he didn¡¯t talk much,¡± said Iskhakova. ¡°He only went to work and came back. He used to work at a warehouse.¡±
Iskhakova said Saipov had been applying for a green card during this time. Ohio state records show he registered a business involving vehicles to her home in May 2011. Iskhakova said her family lost contact with Saipov in recent years. She said she thought he had moved from Ohio to Florida, and then to the New York region, and that he had a wife and two young daughters.
She said she did not know if Saipov was religious. ¡°He¡¯s from my country,¡± Iskhakova said. ¡°His father knows my husband, and sent Sayfullo here because he didn¡¯t know anyone.¡±
Officials in New York said additional resources were deployed around the city, where children would be on the streets late into the evening to celebrate Halloween. The city¡¯s landmark Halloween parade in Greenwich Village, about six blocks from where the rampage began, continued as usual.
At a news conference, the New York governor, Andrew Cuomo, said these resources were being deployed out of an ¡°abundance of caution¡± and that there was no indication of additional threats.
Donald Trump tweeted about the incident: ¡°In NYC, looks like another attack by a very sick and deranged person. Law enforcement is following this closely. NOT IN THE U.S.A.!¡±
He added later: ¡°We must not allow ISIS to return, or enter, our country after defeating them in the Middle East and elsewhere. Enough!¡±
Uzbekistan¡¯s president, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, issued a statement on Wednesday saying the country ¡°is ready to use all forces and resources to help in the investigation of this act of terror,¡± and offered condolences to Trump.
Tom Gay, a school photographer, told the Associated Press he saw a slender man in a blue track suit running southbound on West Street holding a gun. He said there was a heavyset man pursuing him. Gay said he heard five or six shots and the man in the tracksuit fell to the ground, gun still raised in the air. He said a man came over and kicked the gun out of his hand.
Ezequiel Gonzalez, 18, works at the prestigious Stuyvesant high school, which is next to the bicycle path and was locked down after the incident. He told the Guardian he crossed a footbridge that overlooks the bike path and saw ¡°all this debris everywhere¡± near what looked like a body covered by a sheet.
The father of a Sydney girl who died from a gunshot wound to the neck has been denied bail on firearms charges related to an unlicensed sawn-off shotgun.
Paramedics were called to the Lalor Park home in the city¡¯s west about 8pm on Sunday following reports a child had been shot after finding a weapon.
The three-year-old girl was in the home with her mother and three other young siblings when the incident occurred, police said.
It¡¯s unclear how the child sustained the single fatal gunshot wound, but forensic police are investigating whether she accidentally fired the weapon herself.
The girl¡¯s father was charged on Monday morning with possessing an unregistered sawn-off shotgun.
¡°A 43-year-old man from Arncliffe has been charged with several firearm offences and a contravention of apprehended violence order,¡± police said. ¡°He is the father of the child who passed away.¡±
He was also charged with possessing the weapon without a licence and not storing the weapon safely.
The 43-year-old appeared before Blacktown local court and did not apply for bail and it was formally refused.
He is scheduled to appear before the same court again on 1 September.
In a separate incident in Sydney, a 37-year-old man was found shot in the shoulder in Lane Cove on Sunday night. His injury is not thought to be life-threatening and he is being treated at Royal North Shore hospital.
Detectives investigating a fire at the home of millionaire businessman Christopher Foster launched a murder investigation last night after it emerged that his wife Jill, whose body was found in the wreckage of the mansion, died from a gunshot wound to the head.
Police said a second body, which was found nearby, along with a rifle owned by Foster, is that of a man who has yet to be identified.
Superintendent Gary Higgins, of West Mercia constabulary, said: "The two bodies were found close to one another and the body of another dog found nearby. The dog has also been subject of a post-mortem examination, which revealed it too had been shot."
Foster, 50, his wife, 49, and 15-year-old daughter, Kirstie, have been missing since fire swept through Osbaston House in Maesbrook on the Welsh borders early on Tuesday.
The family had been at a friend's barbecue and had returned to the three-storey mansion on Monday evening. It is understood that Kirstie, who is still missing, was using an internet chatroom until 1am on Tuesday morning when the power was cut.
Detectives say the fire started a few hours later, engulfing the house and outbuildings on the ¡Ì1.2m estate. When emergency services arrived they found a horsebox had been parked in front of the electronic gates, with its tyres punctured.
Yesterday there was speculation that Foster, an oil tycoon who owed hundreds of thousands of pounds, may have killed his wife and daughter before setting fire to the house and turning the gun on himself. Another theory was that the family had been killed by one of Foster's business associates who was owed money.
But Terence Baines, a former director of Foster's company, Ulva Ltd, said he thought that was unlikely. "It's anyone's guess, but it seems that the people he owed money to are big companies and I can't see them behind something like this," said Baines. "[Maybe] he just flipped because the pressure of it was too much for him."
Last night detectives said they were following up several lines of inquiry. An all-port alert remains in place. "Although it is now being treated as a murder, we are keeping an open mind as to the circumstances leading up to the incident," said Detective Superintendent Jon Groves of West Mercia constabulary's major investigation unit. "Police continue to work around the clock to establish the facts on what happened at Osbaston House that morning."
Foster made his money developing insulation technology for oil rigs. But the businessman was branded "bereft of the basic instincts of commercial morality" by a high court judge this year.
Court documents show Foster's company, Ulva Ltd, which had gone into liquidation, faced legal action from one of its suppliers for thousands of pounds, and also owed about ¡Ì800,000 in tax.
Forensic teams entered the house on Friday but the fingertip search had to be halted on Saturday night amid fears that a section of the building could collapse.
According to local people, Foster was a well-known and apparently popular figure, with his wife acting as company secretary for the family business. Neighbours said he drove two Porsches and an Aston Martin and had moved to Maesbrook from Telford about four years ago.
Yesterday people gathered to say prayers for the family at nearby St John's church. Addressing the congregation, the Reverend Prebendary David Austerberry said residents had been "bewildered and stunned" by the tragedy. "It is hard to grasp exactly what has happened and it is clearly going to be some time before everything is revealed but today we pray for the Fosters and their family and friends who must be devastated by the events of early last Tuesday morning."
He asked for the family of the Fosters "not to be overwhelmed by the uncertainties of last week" adding that those living in "idyllic" Maesbrook wanted to show their support for them and those involved in investigating the fire.
Speaking after the service, retired farmer Sandy Simpson, 82, said: "We are shocked, absolutely shocked. It's not the sort of thing that occurs in a country district like this."
Bryan Edwards, of Melverley, said: "Everybody is stunned. We want to support the people involved. It's very sad."
Police in Birmingham have become the first in the UK to deploy US-style gunshot sensors in a bid to cut gun crime ? a move that could be followed by other forces.
The technology, said to detect shots within a 25-metre radius from up to two kilometres away, has been installed high up on buildings in areas that experience a high number of firearms incidents.
The sensors record audio clips and give police GPS locations so officers can listen before deciding whether to send other officers to incidents.
Chief Superintendent Chris McKeogh, of West Midlands police, said the Shotspotter had an 85% accuracy rate, telling the BBC: "The soundwaves a bullet produces have a particular 'signature', and that should be recognisable to our force control room officers that have been trained up to listen.
"Shots, or a shot, being fired outside have the best chance [of being detected]. Inside or with a silencer, the ability is not so good."
The system, which costs nearly ¡Ì150,000 to deploy and has an annual upkeep cost of nearly ¡Ì21,000, will operate in areas including Handsworth and Aston.
It has been used to tackle gang-related violence in 51 US cities, and has cut gun crime by nearly one-third in some areas. Other forces, including those in London, Manchester, Nottingham and Liverpool, are believed to have looked at the technology.
McKeogh recently told Jane's Police Product Review that the system would "enable us to respond faster and more effectively to firearms incidents, therefore minimising the harm to local communities and maximising the opportunity to seize illegal firearms, catch offenders and potentially save lives.
"The technology will tell us how many firearms have been discharged prior to officers arriving, which enables us to maximise the safety of our officers and [the] public," he said.
The Home Office-backed system starts months after a ¡Ì3m CCTV system aimed at Muslim areas in the city was removed to rebuild trust with local communities. The force was criticised for not consulting residents properly.
Raj Rattu, a member of the Handsworth residents' group and part of the force's trust and confidence group, told the BBC he was reassured by the approach police had adopted to the gunshot sensors project.
He said 400 residents attended one meeting, at which "mixed views" were expressed.
"Some are for it, some are against it, and we understand police are caught in a dilemma," he added. "We want guns off our streets and gun crime is falling, but we are reassuring residents that the areas are safe and we're working with the police."
The project will be reviewed after six months and again after a year.
Birmingham has seen 295 firearm incidents, with 59 of those involving shots being fired, this year. Last year, there were 440, with 60 involving shots.
The man who was shot by police, sparking the wave of rioting that has hit London, died of a single gunshot wound to the chest, an inquest has heard.
Mark Duggan was killed by armed officers in Ferry Lane in Tottenham, north London, on Thursday after they stopped the minicab he was in to carry out an arrest as part of a pre-planned operation.
An inquest, which began on Tuesday morning at North London coroner's court, in High Barnet, heard that the 29-year-old father of four died of a single gunshot wound to the chest. He was pronounced dead at 6.41pm on Thursday evening.
Colin Sparrow, the deputy senior investigator for the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC), told the brief hearing that the organisation's "complex investigation" could take four to six months.
The coroner for the northern district of Greater London, Andrew Walker, adjourned the hearing until 12 December, when a pre-inquest review will be held.
Walker told members of Duggan's family, including his fiancee, Semone Wilson: "Can I just offer my deepest sympathies to the family of Mark Duggan.
"As members of the family will know, in due course there will be an inquest touching the death of Mark Duggan and this is the first stage in that process.
"Of course, as well as offering our deepest sympathies to members of the family, I would like to reassure members of the family that we will be working closely with the IPCC throughout the process."
Iraq hostages Jason Swindlehurst and Jason Creswell, who were seized in Baghdad in 2007, died from gun wounds, an inquest heard today. Creswell, 39, originally from Glasgow, and Swindlehurst, 38, from Skelmersdale, Lancashire, were among a group of five kidnapped Britons.At an inquest that was opened and adjourned todayday, Salisbury coroner David Ridley was told by Detective Chief Inspector Mark Moles, of the Metropolitan police, that tattoos helped identify the two bodies that were delivered to a police station in Baghdad. Three other hostages are still missing in Iraq.
Following reports of multiple attacks on the offices of Democrats who voted for healthcare reform over the weekend, Republican House whip Eric Cantor held an angry press conference on Thursday claiming that his office had been attacked by gunshot and accusing Democrats of "dangerously fanning the flames". But on closer examination the "attack" on Cantor's office turns out to be ambiguous at the least.
On Thursday, Cantor said:
He went on to say: "It is reckless to use these incidents as media vehicles for political gain. That is why I have deep concerns that some [senior Democrats] are dangerously fanning the flames by suggesting that these incidents be used as a political weapon."
So what happened at Cantor's office in the Virginia district he represents? Let's read yesterday's official press release from the local police:
Richmond Police Investigate Cantor Building Vandalism
The Richmond Police Department is investigating an act of vandalism at the Reagan Building, 25 East Main St, Richmond, Virginia. A first floor window was struck by a bullet at approximately 1am on Tuesday, March 23. The building, which has several tenants including an office used by Congressman Eric Cantor, was unoccupied at the time. A Richmond Police detective was assigned to the case. A preliminary investigation shows that a bullet was fired into the air and struck the window in a downward direction, landing on the floor about a foot from the window. The round struck with enough force to break the windowpane but did not penetrate the window blinds. There was no other damage to the room, which is used occasionally for meetings by the congressman.
So let's see: the police describe it "vandalism", and say a "bullet was fired in the air" and broke the window on its way down but so weakly that it couldn't even make it through the window blinds. Was Cantor's office the object of the attack? Today the Richmond police are describing the event as "an act of random gunfire," which seems more accurate.
Of course, other facts may come to light. Until they do, while Cantor's claim is true in a strict sense ? a bullet was fired and it did go through the window of his office ? it would seem he's making more of this than the incident deserves. And since the office is in Virginia ? a state where "open carry" of firearms is legal and a hotspot of gun ownership ? the occasional bullet is going be found.
Certainly, it doesn't compare to the unambiguous attack on the Democratic party office in Rochester, New York, in the form of a brick with a note attached reading: "Exremism [sic] in the defense of liberty is no vice" ? a phrase coined by Republican presidential candidate and conservative icon Barry Goldwater.
Cantor, like other US politicians, has certainly received threats over the years: Fox News's report on the vandalism noted: "Cantor is the highest-elected Jewish official in the country and the only Jewish Republican in the House." Several leading Republicans have condemned the attacks, including House minority leader John Boehner, who said yesterday: "Violence and threats are unacceptable. They have no place in a political debate. We need to take that anger and channel it into what I would describe as positive change."
A tense, six-hour standoff between armed police and Raoul Moat, Britain's most wanted man, ended early this morning when the fugitive shot himself.
At 1.10am a single gunshot was heard at the scene of the standoff and police were reported to have surrounded Moat and jumped on him. In a statement, the police said "no shots were fired by police officers" and it "appears the suspect shot himself".
An ambulance reportedly sped from the scene, taking the former nightclub bouncer, 37, to a Newcastle hospital. Sources said Moat was pronounced dead on arrival.
Having evaded capture for a week, Moat had been surrounded in the Northumberland village of Rothbury for six hours as armed snipers trained their guns on him while he pointed a shotgun at his neck.
Moat was wanted over the shooting of his ex-girlfriend Samantha Stobbart, and the fatal shooting of her partner, Chris Brown, last Saturday, and the shooting of PC David Rathband on Sunday.
Just after 7pm yesterday Moat made a break from his hiding place near Cragside, around 300 metres from Rothbury. One witness said they saw him being chased by armed officers on the eastern edge of the village.
Another said they saw Moat being pursued across the front lawn of their home in the riverbank area of Rothbury at around 7.10pm, while other accounts described him walking along the bank of the river Coquet when two police officers approached him.
Within moments Moat was said to have gone down flat on his stomach and put a sawn-off shotgun to his neck, his finger apparently on the trigger. In seconds he was surrounded by 10 marksmen.
Trained police negotiators tried to talk with Moat, who was in a highly agitated state, shouting at officers who ordered him to lie on the ground.
Marksmen trained their guns and taser guns on him, while snipers lay on the banks of the river and behind an armoured police vehicle. An RAF Tornado plane with infra-red equipment roared overhead.
As daylight faded, police sent in food and water to try to help develop a rapport and trust. It was reported that Moat's friend Tony Laidler had arrived to try to assist with negotiations.
As torrential rain poured on the scene, the deadlock was broken at just after 1am when a single shot was heard, followed by the sound of shouting.
A police spokesman said: "We can confirm that a shot has been fired. It's believed that the suspect has a gunshot wound. No officers have been injured. The circumstances have yet to be established."
The temporary chief constable of Northumbria police, Sue Sim, said: "While the incident has been brought to a close we must be mindful of the impact it has had on many lives. Our thoughts are with the family and friends of those affected.
"I'd like to thank the public, particularly the community of Rothbury, for their continued help throughout the inquiry. This has been a difficult time for them and their support has been invaluable."
The force also confirmed that the incident had been referred to the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) because officers had had contact with Moat prior to his death.
The IPCC commissioner, Nicholas Long, said: "Early indications show that gunshots were not fired by police officers and this will of course form part of the IPCC independent investigation. It is also understood that a police officer did discharge a Taser and our investigation will also look at this."
Sim later confirmed that a taser had been fired, "however, this did not prevent his death".
The independent police watchdog is already investigating whether Northumbria police took adequate action after they received a warning from Durham prison after Moat's release that he might intend to cause serious harm to Stobbart.
Moat had remained at large for a week, allegedly aided by friends and associates. Six people have been arrested in connection with the investigation so far and two have already appeared before magistrates charged with conspiracy to commit murder and possession of a firearm.
Hundreds of officers were involved in the search, with 14 additional forces brought in, including 40 officers from the Metropolitan police's C019 sniper unit and 20 armoured police cars shipped in from Northern Ireland.
Throughout the inquiry, Northumbria police remained convinced Moat was in the area, despite cynicism as the search went on. Local sources believe Moat may have been sleeping rough in a storm drain that runs beneath the town.
He was wearing a blue-grey hooded top, baseball cap, dark jeans and white trainers. Earlier yesterday police were investigating claims that Moat had been spotted walking down the high street in Rothbury on Thursday at 11.45pm.
The sighting came just three hours after Northumbria's temporary chief constable, Sue Sim, told hundreds of worried villagers at a public meeting: "I'm not saying he's going to be walking down the road with a gun."
Yesterday evening there was a sense of panic as marksmen flooded into the village, which was cordoned off. Residents were told by officers to "go home and lock the door".
Peter Abiston was watching Moat throughout: "There are about 20 armed officers lying down pointing weapons at him. He looks very calm. It looks as though the police clearly have it under control."
Chris Robertson said he thought he had seen Moat holding a gun to his neck. "There was a man down by the river with what appeared to be a sawn-off shotgun pointing to his own neck. He was about 150 yards away. I wasn't sure it was Moat. Then the police came and pointed their rifles at him."
Retired taxi driver Dave Murray, 67, said Moat appeared to have been chased through the village and was heading east before being cornered at the primary school tennis courts and bowling green.
Armed police have been carrying out search operations in the town since Tuesday, but it is extraordinary that Moat was able to remain at large for so long. Earlier yesterday, there was a collision involving two police cars as they rushed to the area. It is not clear if anyone was injured.
In a surreal development, the former England and Newcastle footballer Paul Gascoigne turned up at the police cordon in an intoxicated state claiming to be a friend of Moat, and offering to give the fugitive assistance.
The man and his two children who died when he drove off a wharf at Port Lincoln on Monday had suffered gunshot wounds, the police say.
Damien Little died with his sons Koda, four, and Hunter, 10 months, when he drove off the wharf into 30m of water in Port Lincoln, South Australia.
Superintendent Paul Yeomans said autopsies had been completed and confirmed the gunshot wounds suffered by 10-month-old Hunter, four-year-old Koda and their 34-year-old father.
Police had previously revealed that a rifle was recovered from Little¡¯s car.
Yeomans said domestic violence and mental health would form part of a report to the coroner when the investigation was complete.
Little¡¯s wife Melissa released a statement on Friday saying words could not express the pain she had been feeling since the deaths.
¡°Damien was my childhood sweetheart who became my loving husband,¡± she said. ¡°He was also a father who loved his two children very much.
¡°Damien valued and appreciated our close-knit family, he put us first, we were his whole world,¡± she said.
His death had ¡°left a huge hole in my heart¡±.
¡°My two precious boys have left this world way too soon and my heart is broken,¡± she said. ¡°I shall miss them and think about them each and every day.
She said she wanted her husband to be remembered as a ¡°well respected and valued member of our family and our community¡±.A British tourist killed in a terror attack in Tunisia died of gunshot wounds to her stomach and pelvis, a coroner has heard.
Sally Adey was killed in the shooting at the Bardo museum in Tunis on 18 March.
Adey, a retired solicitor from Caynton, Shropshire, had been on a Mediterranean cruise with her husband Robert, 52, who survived the attack.
At the opening of her inquest on Tuesday, the senior coroner for Shropshire, John Ellery, heard Adey¡¯s husband identified her body at the Charles Nicolle hospital in Tunis the day after the attack.
Coroner¡¯s officer Julie Hartridge said Adey, who had two children, and her husband had disembarked from the MSC Splendida in Tunis before going to the museum.
¡°It is reported the museum came under fire from gunmen and she received fatal gunshot wounds,¡± she added.
Hartridge said a postmortem carried out in the UK on 25 March had established the provisional cause of death as ¡°consistent with gunshot wounds to the abdomen and pelvis¡±.
More than 20 people were killed in the attack, including 17 cruise ship tourists.
Two gunmen were killed in a gun battle with security forces. Islamic State later claimed responsibility for the attack.
On Sunday, the Tunisian government said another suspect implicated in the terror assault had been killed near the Algerian border.
Ellery, opening the proceedings at Shrewsbury¡¯s Shirehall, adjourned the hearing until 2 July.
Unverified footage from a Twitter user appears to show people running from a shopping centre in the German city of Munich on Friday evening after a gunman opened fire in the building. The building, located in the district of Moosach, was evacuated amid a major police operation
North Korean soldiers fired about 40 rounds at a comrade fleeing into South Korea and hit him five times, the south¡¯s military has said.
South Korean soldiers did not fire their weapons, but Monday¡¯s incident occurred at a time of heightened animosity over North Korea¡¯s nuclear programme. The north has expressed intense anger over past high-profile defections. It was the first shooting at the jointly controlled area of the heavily fortified border in more than 30 years.
The soldier is being treated at a South Korean hospital after a five-hour operation for the gunshot wounds he suffered during his escape across the joint security area (JSA). His personal details and motive for defection are unknown.
South Korea¡¯s military said on Tuesday that he had suffered injuries to his internal organs but was not in a life-threatening condition. But the Ajou University medical centre near Seoul said the soldier was relying on a breathing machine after the surgery. Lee Guk-jong, a doctor who leads Ajou¡¯s medical team for the soldier, described his patient¡¯s condition as ¡°very dangerous¡± and said the next 10 days might determine whether he recovered.
He first drove a military jeep during his escape but left the vehicle when one of its wheels fell into a ditch. He then fled across the JSA with North Korean soldiers chasing and firing at him, South Korea¡¯s military said, citing unspecified surveillance systems installed in the area.
Suh Wook, chief director of operations for South Korea¡¯s joint chiefs of staff, told lawmakers that North Korean forces had fired a total of about 40 rounds in a shooting that his office suggested had started while the soldier was in the jeep.
The soldier was found beneath a pile of leaves on the southern side of the JSA and South Korean troops crawled there to recover him. A UN command helicopter later transported him to the Ajou medical centre, according to South Korean officials.
North Korea¡¯s official media had not reported the case as of Tuesday afternoon. They have previously accused South Korea of kidnapping or enticing North Koreans to defect. About 30,000 North Koreans have fled to South Korea, mostly via China, since the end of the 1950-53 Korean war.
The JSA is jointly overseen by the American-led UN command and by North Korea, with South Korean and North Korean border guards facing each other only metres apart. It is located inside the 2.5-mile-wide (4km) demilitarised zone (DMZ) that has formed the de facto border between the Koreas since the Korean war. While both sides of the DMZ are guarded by barbed-wire fences, mines and tank traps, the JSA includes the truce village of Panmunjom, which provides the site for rare talks and draws curious tourists.
Monday¡¯s incident was the first shooting at the JSA since North Korean and UN command soldiers traded gunfire when a Soviet citizen defected by sprinting to the South Korean sector of the JSA in 1984.
A man has died after being shot on a street corner in north London. Police were called to the scene in Enfield after a member of the public flagged down officers on a routine patrol of the area at 9.10pm on Wednesday.
They found the victim, believed to be in his 40s or 50s, on Bounces Road at the junction with Westminster Road. He was found to be suffering from a gunshot injury. Crews from the London ambulance service were called to the scene as well as specialist firearms officers.
The man was pronounced dead at 9.44pm and his next of kin are yet to be informed. A postmortem will be held in due course.
The Metropolitan police¡¯s homicide and major crime command have been informed of the shooting but no arrests have been made and they are making inquiries.
A wealthy City financier who left his high-powered post at a banking group after a disastrous buyout has been found dead with gunshot wounds, it emerged today.
Huibert Boumeester, 49, vanished at the start of last week on the day he was to meet a headhunter in London.
Police said the father-of-three had been feeling down and fears for his safety grew when it was noticed that two of his shotguns were missing. His body was discovered in woodland in Berkshire yesterday morning.
A Thames Valley police spokesman said: "He is believed to have died from gunshot wounds. At the moment it is being treated as an unexplained death."
Boumeester, a Dutch citizen, was chief financial officer at ABN Amro and at the heart of its buyout by the Royal Bank of Scotland in 2007. He remained in his post until March last year and left as part of a prearranged deal.
Friends said Boumeester had no financial worries. He had two homes in London, land in Scotland where he went shooting, and a wealthy family and had made around ¡Ì600,000 a year in the City, with bonuses on top.
He was said to be considering offers of a number of non-executive boardroom positions when he disappeared.
One friend said: "I think it would be wrong to leap to the conclusion that this came about directly because of the credit crunch. Obviously he had been under pressure in the last few years but it's not as if he didn't know where his next penny was coming from. He had enough money never to have to work again."
Boumeester joined ABN Amro as a management trainee in 1987 and held positions including country manager in Malaysia and global head of integrated energy. He became chief financial officer in 2007 and played a key role in trying to fend off the Royal Bank of Scotland takeover.
Friends said Boumeester was talented and popular. One, who worked closely with him, said: "He was a very charismatic and colourful individual, very professional and very driven. He was the consummate deal-maker. Making deals was what gave him great fun and amusement. Making money was not his main motivation. He loved the thrill of the deal."
The friend said Boumeester had been involved in the Royal Bank of Scotland take-over from start to finish. "He had such energy. He kept going when much younger men were flagging. It couldn't be true that he was depressed because he lost his job. He did not have any financial worries. There must be some personal trauma behind this."
Boumeester had travelled widely during his career and he set up the Boumeester Foundation to conserve cultures in countries such as Vietnam, China and Bhutan. The foundation's website says: "Living and working in Asia has stirred the interest of Huibert Boumeester in Asian cultures and has made him more aware of the dangers these cultures are facing."
He was also keen on country pursuits, especially shooting. "Though he was Dutch, he came over as quite the English gentleman," said a friend.
The financier was found in woodland in Drift Road, Winkfield, near Bracknell, Berkshire. Police had been contacted when he did not appear for a meeting with a headhunter in London last Monday.
Boumeester's family said today that they did not wish to comment.
The former NFL quarterback Steve McNair, a three-time Pro Bowler who led the Tennessee Titans to the Super Bowl in 2000, has been found dead in a condominium in Nashville, Tennessee, with multiple gunshot wounds, including one to the head. A 20-year-old woman, Sahel Kazemi, was also found dead at the scene with a single gunshot wound to the head. A gun was lying near to her body.
Police said that when they arrived the 36-year-old McNair was on the sofa in the living room and Kazemi was very close to him on the floor. A police spokesman, Don Aaron, said McNair's wife, Mechelle, was "distraught" and suggested she was not currently being considered as a suspect.
"At this juncture, we do not believe she is involved," he said. "Nothing has been ruled out, but as far as actively looking for a suspect tonight, the answer would be no."
The bodies were discovered Saturday afternoon by McNair's friend Wayne Neeley, who said he rents the condo, in the Rutlege Hill neighbourhood, with McNair. Aaron said Neeley told authorities he went into the condo and walked first into the kitchen before going into the living room where he saw blood, then McNair on the sofa and Kazemi on the floor. Neeley then called a friend, who alerted authorities.
Police said a witness saw McNair arrive at the condo between 1.30am and 2am on Saturday and that Kazemi's vehicle was already there. Two days ago, Nashville police arrested Kazemi on a drink-driving charge while she was driving a car registered to her and McNair. McNair was in the front seat. He was allowed to leave by taxi.
The arrest affidavit said Kazemi had bloodshot eyes and the smell of alcohol on her breath, but refused a breathalyser test, saying "she was not drunk, she was high".
Fred McNair, Steve McNair's oldest brother, said some family members would travel to Nashville tomorrow to consult with Steve McNair's wife.
"It's still kind of hard to believe," he said. "He was the greatest person in the world. He gave back to the community. He loved kids and he wanted to be a role model to kids." Fred McNair said he did not know who Kazemi was.
McNair and his family frequented the restaurant where Kazemi was a waitress, according to employees and patrons of Dave & Buster's in Nashville. Keith Norfleet, Kazemi's ex-boyfriend, told The Tennessean newspaper that McNair and Kazemi met at the restaurant.
"She was reliable 90% of the time," the restaurant's manager, Chris Truelove, said of Kazemi. "She was pretty outgoing. A lot of the guests liked being around her, and she liked being around the guests."
In June, McNair opened a restaurant near the Tennessee State University campus. It was closed on Saturday evening but it had become a small memorial. Flowers, candles and notes had been placed outside the door.
"It is a terrible tragedy and our hearts go out to the families involved," the NFL commissioner, Roger Goodell, said in a statement.
"He was one of the finest players to play for our organization and one of the most beloved players by our fans," the Titans owner, Bud Adams, said in a statement. "He played with unquestioned heart and leadership and led us to places that we had never reached, including our only Super Bowl."
McNair led the Titans to within a yard of forcing overtime at Super Bowl XXXIV, which they lost 23?16 to the St Louis Rams. He also played for the Baltimore Ravens and was joint-MVP of the NFL in 2003. His most famous drive, the last one in that Super Bowl, came when he led the Titans 87 yards in the final minute and 48 seconds, only to come up a yard short of the tying touchdown. Kevin Dyson caught his last pass, but was tackled at the one-yard line. McNair accounted for all of Tennessee's yards in that drive, throwing for 48 yards and rushing for 14 with the rest of the yardage coming from penalties. Before that, he brought the Titans back from a 16?0 deficit to tie the game.
"If you were going to draw a football player, the physical part, the mental part, everything about being a professional, he is your guy," McNair's former Ravens and Titans team-mate Samari Rolle said. "I can't even wrap my arms around it. It is a sad, sad day. The world lost a great man today."
McNair began his NFL career in 1995 with the Houston Oilers, the team who eventually became the Titans, and finished with 31,304 yards passing and 174 touchdowns. He played with pain for several years, and injuries ultimately forced him to retire.
"On the field, there isn't player that was as tough as him, especially at the quarterback position," the Ravens' Derrick Mason said. "What I have seen him play through on the field, and what he dealt with during the week to get ready for a game, I have never known a better team-mate."
McNair played all 16 games in 2006, his first season in Baltimore, and guided the Ravens to a 13?3 record. But he injured his groin and subsequently retired in April 2008.
"He was a player who I admired a great deal," said the New England Patriots' senior football adviser, Floyd Reese, who was general manager of the Titans when McNair played for them. "He was a tremendous leader and an absolute warrior. He felt like it was his responsibility to lead by working hard every day, no matter what."
A mayor and two journalists have been shot dead by a gunman in the town of Imatra in south-east Finland.
The three women were shot in the head and chest by a sniper who opened fire on a pedestrian area in the nightlife district just before midnight on Saturday.
Police confirmed that a 23-year-old man had been taken into custody after Imatra city council chair, Tiina Wilen-Jappinen, and the two reporters were killed outside a restaurant in what appears to be a random shooting. They said he obeyed orders and did not resist arrest.
Police said that the victims, two in their 50s and one in her mid-30s, had sustained multiple gunshot wounds from a hunting rifle and that no motive had been established for the attack.
Saku Tielinen, who is leading the investigation, said the suspect had a criminal record including for violent incidents and theft, but declined to identify him or give details. ¡°There is no indication of a political motive. It seems the gunman and victims didn¡¯t know each other,¡± said Tielinen. ¡°All indications are that he chose his victims randomly.¡±
Investigators said the suspect arrived outside the restaurant in his car and shot the three women as they stepped out of the restaurant. He then waited in the car until police arrived, and accompanied officers silently and peacefully. Imatra, which has a population of 28,000, is about 140 miles (230km) east of the Finnish capital, Helsinki.
Witnesses said there were many people around at the time of the attack, which has left the town in a state of shock. ¡°We decided to open a crisis centre after the shooting occurred right in the middle of the town centre near restaurants and nightclubs,¡± said Saara Raudasoja, a spokeswoman for the South Karelia social and health care district.
She added: ¡°In such a small place, it¡¯s quite a huge incident and many people were shocked.¡±
There are 650,000 officially registered gun owners in Finland, which has a population of 5.4 million people. The country has a history of strong hunting traditions but gun laws have been tightened following two fatal school shootings in the last decade.
ELEMENTS OF THE IRAQI POLICE ARRESTED THE DETAINEE WHILE HE WAS IN FALLUJAH GENERAL HOSPITAL FOR TREATMENT FOR A GUNSHOT WOUND (GSW) TO THE LEG. IRAQI POLICE BROUGHT THIS DETAINEE AND OTHERS SUSPECTED OF INVOLVEMENT IN AN ASSASSINATION ATTEMPT ON IRAQI POLICE MAJ AZEZ EARLIER ON 29 JAN 07 BACK TO THE POLICE STATION AT THE JCC AND HIT THE DETAINEES IN THE PARKING LOT OUTSIDE OF THE POLICE STATION AS THEY UNLOADED THEM. PTT MEMBERS WHO WITNESSED THIS FROM AN OBSERVATION POST IMMEDIATELY CONTACTED THE CHIEF OF POLICE TO HAVE HIM CORRECT HIS PERSONNEL. THE CHIEF OF POLICE STOPPED THE BEHAVIOR. SUBSEQUENTLY, DURING A SPOT CHECK OF THE IRAQI POLICE MAJOR CRIMES UNIT, A PTT MEMBER DISCOVERED THE DETAINEE LYING ON THE FLOOR IN AN OFFICE, BLEEDING FROM A GSW TO THE LEG. A CORPSMAN WAS CONTACTED TO ADMINISTER FIRST AID/STABILIZE, AND THE DETAINEE WAS EVACUATED BY PTT MEMBERS TO FALLUJAH SURGICAL ON CAMP FALLUJAH.
For entry into FusionNet.
The attachment documents an alleged IP on IZ LOAC violation (detainee abuse) as reported by RCT-6. As Coalition Forces were not involved in the alleged abuse, no further investigation is necessary. A summary of the alleged incident is as follows:
On 29 Jan 07, IP apprehended detainee Mehdi Said on suspicion of participation in an assassination attempt of an IP Major. After his apprehension, IP hit him in the parking lot outside the IP station. PTT informed the IP Chief of the abuse, and the IP Chief immediately addressed the behavior. Later during a spot check of the Major Crimes Unit, PTT found detainee Mehdi Said on the deck in an office bleeding from a GSW. PTT medically evacuated detainee Mehdi Said to Fallujah Surgical for further treatment.
Journalist Mohamed Mohamud, commonly known as "Tima'ade," died of gunshot wounds on Saturday (26 October) at a hospital in the Somali capital, Mogadishu.
Mohamed, a 26-year-old reporter who covered social and security issues for the privately-owned, UK-based Universal TV, was shot four days before. He suffered injuries to his neck, chest, and shoulder.
It is unclear who carried out the attack, although a Twitter account claiming to represent Islamist insurgent group Al-Shabaab took responsibility for the shooting.
The Somali government denounced the attack. Prime minister Abdi Farah Shirdon tweeted: "Government won't tolerate violence against journalists. There must be no impunity for cowardly thugs who want to take Somalia backwards."
At least four journalists and media workers have been murdered in Somalia this year and no arrests have been made.
Former San Diego Chargers safety Paul Oliver was found dead on Tuesday. The cause of his death was reported to have been a self-inflicted gunshot.
On Wednesday, the Chargers released a statement which said: "Everyone in the Chargers family is sad today after hearing the news about Paul. He was part of our family for five years. At just 29 years old, he still had a lifetime in front of him. Right now all of our thoughts and prayers are with his family during this most difficult time."
The news immediately contributed to debate on social media and in the press about the effects of head injuries suffered by NFL players. Last month, the NFL reached a $765m settlement with thousands of former players who were sueing the league over the issue.
The case of Junior Seau, a longtime Chargers star linebacker who died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound at the age of 43 in 2012, also focused attention on the subject. Seau's family sued the NFL and the league's helmet maker, Riddell. The case was covered under the settlement reached last month. Other well-known cases include that of Dave Duerson, a star safety with the Chicago Bears and New York Giants who in February 2011 shot himself in the chest, leaving a note requesting that his brain be studied.
Both Seau and Duerson were found to have been suffering from chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or CTE, a degenerative disease that is similar to Alzheimer's, causing memory loss, irritability and mood changes.
Oliver, a fourth-round pick from the University of Georgia in the 2007 supplemental draft, spent four seasons in the NFL. His best season was 2010, when according to figures released by the Chargers, he made eight starts, recording 62 tackles, an interception and a forced fumble and breaking up three passes. He had not played in the NFL since being released by the New Orleans Saints during 2011 preseason.
The Atlanta Journal Constitution reported a police spokesman confirming that the weapon involved in Oliver's death was a handgun. The police spokesman did not provide further details. The newspaper reported the Georgia coach, Mark Richt, as saying news of Oliver's death was "heartbreaking".
"I'm just, I mean I was just crushed this morning when I heard it, quite frankly," Richt said. "I really haven't been able to keep it off my mind."
The San Diego Tribune reported that Oliver left a wife and two children and that his family had requested privacy.
Gun violence in the US isn¡¯t just bad, it¡¯s uniquely bad in terms of the number of lives that are affected by it and how rare such violence is in a wealthy country. The charts below illustrate the scale of the problem.
Other wealthy countries don¡¯t have as many guns as the US. They don¡¯t have as many gun deaths as the US, either.
Comparisons can help us to understand scale. Since 1968, when these figures were first collected, there have been 1,516,863 gun-related deaths on US territory. Since the founding of the United States, there have been 1,396,733 war deaths. That figure includes American lives lost in the revolutionary war, the Mexican war, the civil war (Union and Confederate, estimate), the Spanish-American war, the first world war, the second world war, the Korean war, the Vietnam war, the Gulf war, the Afghanistan war, the Iraq war, as well as other conflicts, including in Lebanon, Grenada, Panama, Somalia and Haiti.
Sources: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1994 (gun death data), Congressional Research Service, 2010 (conflict deaths). Numbers updated by Politifact in 2015
When people think of gun violence, they might think of large-scale mass shootings like the one in Las Vegas on Sunday, in which 59 people were killed. But of the approximately 33,000 gun violence deaths that take place each year, only about 500 (or 1.5%) come from mass shootings. Two-thirds of gun violence deaths are from suicide.
What doesn¡¯t this chart show? The more than 70,000 people who are injured by guns each year.
The 13-year-old son of a US air force lieutenant colonel based at a military facility in England has died from gunshot wounds in what was described by an air force spokesman as a "tragic accident".
The boy was shot in the head at a house in Souldern, near Bicester, Oxfordshire, on Sunday morning.
He died at the John Radcliffe hospital in Oxford with his family by his side. His father is understood to be based at the US air force base in RAF Croughton.
Thames Valley police are investigating how the teenager died and said: "The exact circumstances are as yet unclear." The police are not treating the boy's death as suspicious.
Police have launched a murder investigation after a teenager was shot and killed on a council estate in east London.
Firearms officers and ambulance crew found the boy, said to be in his mid-teens, with a gunshot injury in Newham on Friday night. He was pronounced dead at the scene.
Shortly afterwards a man in his early 20s was found nearby with a gunshot wound. He was taken to hospital and is said to be in a stable condition.
DCI Jamie Piscopo, of the Metropolitan police¡¯s homicide and major crime command, launched an investigation to try to establish the circumstances that led to the shootings and whether they were linked.
No arrests have been made and police have appealing for information and witnesses.
Newham had the most recorded gun discharges of any London borough in the 12 months to February, as well as the third highest number of victims of serious youth violence.
The Togo goalkeeper Kodjovi Obilale feels he is akin to "a miracle" after surviving the attack on the team bus in Angola.
The 25-year-old was travelling to the Africa Cup of Nations with the rest of his team-mates prior to the start of the competition when they were shot at with machine guns in the Cabinda region of the country.
Three people died in the 8 January incident ? the bus driver, an assistant coach and a press officer ? while Obilale, who was initially also reported as dead, had to be flown to South Africa for emergency treatment after sustaining gunshot wounds in the lower back and abdomen.
"I'm a miracle," the France-based goalkeeper told L'Equipe newspaper from Milpark Hospital in Johannesburg, where he has been since the attack. "I'm alive, I'm doing well, I'm talking, eating and breathing.
"I want to go back home. When the tension increases in me, I lose it, I want to break everything. I want to see my children again and be back with those closest to me."
In this business, you¡¯re always on the lookout for fresh new cliches. My writer friends Matthew Norman and James Hanning, connoisseurs of cliche, used to play a call-and-response game to entertain the rest of us. (¡°What do ¡®refugees¡¯ do?¡± ? ¡°They clutch pathetic bundles!¡±; ¡°What do ¡®costs¡¯ do?¡± ? ¡°They spiral out of control!¡±) So in a way it¡¯s exciting for me as a film reviewer to welcome the newest and most tiresome cliche in the cinema: the gunshot-plus-desolate-whine. It used to be that in war movies, with a ghastly shooting incident, you¡¯d just get a gunshot. Bang! And that would be it. Nowadays that¡¯s not good enough. You have to follow the deafening gunshot by suddenly blanking out all background noise except a sustained, ultra-high-pitched earache-inducing whine for a good 10 seconds while the agonised rookie soldier falls down with a silent scream ? indicating temporary deafness, of course, but also the poor guy¡¯s numb sense of shock, guilt and horror at collateral damage in wartime. Eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee. Every single war movie I see contains the gunshot-plus-desolate-whine, a dog whistle to evoke emotional despair. Can we please go back to just having a gunshot, and get on with the script?
In an attempt to snag first-time buyers, along with discontented Generation Rent voters and perhaps the harassed bank-of-mum-and-dad generation, Ed Miliband has promised to abolish stamp duty for young people getting on the housing ladder. Now, of course, there¡¯s a row about the loss in Treasury income. This is a sore subject for me. It is the only topic on which I have been moved to enter the vexed realm of economic policy. When I bought a flat I became obsessed with the obvious injustice of stamp duty being levied on the buyer and not the seller ? who is, after all, the one in receipt of taxable cash and probably realising a profit. Why not simply change the law to make sellers pay the stamp duty? It¡¯s an inducement to first-time buyers and there¡¯s no loss to the Treasury ? in fact, by shunting the tax one stage up the chain, the Treasury take increases. Excitedly, I would go up to all the economic journalists in the office and gabble about my super-plan. They merely waved me away. ¡°Please,¡± they would say, ¡°you¡¯re way out of your depth. Stick to your popcorn-munching, you dilettante.¡± Huh. All I can say is that if the Labour policy wonks wish to introduce my scheme and make me a life peer, that would be fine.
To advance my artistic education, I have been to visit the Indigenous Australia exhibition at London¡¯s British Museum: the artworks really are compelling, and the 40,000-year tradition of which they are a part induces awe and a kind of vertigo. Perhaps inevitably, I found myself mesmerised most by the single most famous painting: Yumari (1981) by Uta Uta Tjangala, a wandering figure that represents the mythic history of landscape. Looked at for a length of time, the circles in the design seem to pulse or shimmer or scintillate. Newcomer that I am, I think I understand how the picture goes beyond primitivism and nearer to the idea of transcendental simplicity ? although that, too, may not do justice to the complexity and sophistication of the image. As my colleague Jonathan Jones says, the exhibition makes you think again about culture and civilisation. As I wandered around, Saul Bellow¡¯s disputed remark ¡°Where is the Marcel Proust of Papua New Guinea?¡± floated into my head. It is a wonderful exhibition.
At least five people have died and 15 others have been injured after a shooting outside a club on the last night of the BPM electronic music festival in Mexico.
The shooting occurred in the early hours of the morning outside the Blue Parrot nightclub in Playa del Carmen, said Rodolfo Del Angel, police director in Quintana Roo state.
Del Angel told the Milenio TV station that the shooting was the result of ¡°a disagreement between people inside¡± the nightclub, and that security guards had come under fire when they tried to contain the dispute.
State officials gave the death toll and said two Canadians, one Italian and one Colombian person ? all BPM employees ? were among the dead. They did not confirm reports in local media that attributed the attack to a drug dealing dispute.
In a statement BPM said members of its security team were killed and that the incident involved a lone gunman.
The Blue Parrot was hosting a closing party for the 10-day music festival, which is popular with foreign tourists, when the shooting happened. Glasgow-based DJ Jackmaster tweeted about the incident as the first reports emerged:
Video footage shows dozens of people fleeing the scene in panic. In one, shouts of ¡°he¡¯s got a gun¡± can be heard.
A BPM statement published on Facebook said: ¡°We are overcome with grief over this senseless act of violence and we are cooperating fully with local law enforcement and government officials as they continue their investigation.¡±
The UK Foreign Office said embassy staff in Mexico were urgently looking into the situation. It said any Britons caught up in the incident should follow the advice of local authorities. The Foreign Office issued advice including a telephone number for anyone worried about friends or family members in Mexico.
Valerie Lee, Mixmag¡¯s US digital editor, who was at Blue Parrot when the shooting happened, described what she saw. ¡°We were there for maybe 20 minutes when we heard four to five shots,¡± she told the Guardian. ¡°Everyone was kind of processing it for a second then people starting running away from the main entrance towards the back.
¡°There is a large cement wall so we kind of crouched underneath waiting to see what was happening. People started saying it was just fireworks. But shortly after other people came running through the area and said they had seen someone with a gun.¡±Lee said after crouching under a metal table behind the wall for up to five more minutes she fled out of the back of the club into the street, where people were crying.
¡°We later talked to a friend who had been outside when it happened. He said he was 20 feet away from the shooter and that he saw five bodies on the ground before he ran away. The shooters didn¡¯t seem to enter the club, they just kind of shot towards the front entrance and did not get in. People seem to be saying shooters but I¡¯m not positive [how many there were].¡±
Another witness, who gave her name as Angel, told Dazed magazine: ¡°We heard what appeared to be gunshots, but a worker told us to calm down, [saying] it was just fireworks. People started getting up and again the shots started. My friends saw the shooter running across the back of the club, shooting into it through a metal rail. One of my friends saw a person shot and bleeding.
¡°Once the shooting stopped, we jumped over that same fence and ran on the beach about 10 blocks. We were helped by some other partygoers by letting us hang out in their hotel for a few minutes. They saw a guy shot in the head.¡±
The shooting will be a blow to Mexico¡¯s tourist industry. The BPM festival, which was celebrating its 10th year, has grown to become one of the most important electronic events in the festival calendar, attracting top DJs from around the world.
Quintana Roo and the surrounding Yucatan peninsula have traditionally been less violent than other parts of Mexico, with relatively low murder rates. However, the presence of foreign tourists and a vibrant nightlife scene means there has long been an important local drug market in and around Playa Del Carmen.
Kim Kardashian West has been robbed at gunpoint in a private residence in Paris by assailants disguised as police who made off with millions of pounds worth of jewellery.
A spokeswoman for the reality TV star said she was ¡°badly shaken but physically unharmed¡± after they tied her up in the flat¡¯s bathroom before fleeing the scene.
A Paris police official told the Associated Press that five armed men, who were still at large, stole a jewellery box containing valuables worth ¢æ6m (¡Ì5.2m) as well as a ring worth ¢æ4m, and mobile telephones. Police said the robbers escaped on bicycles.
French media reported that the men, who had masks and were wearing fake police armbands, arrived at about 3am on Monday and threatened the concierge at the building in rue Tronchet, near the Madeleine church and not far from the Elysee Palace, the British embassy and the designer shops of rue du Faubourg-Saint Honore.
The robbers handcuffed the concierge before ordering him to show them where Kardashian West was staying. After forcing their way into the apartment they tied her up and locked her in the bathroom.
¡°The haul amounts to several million euros, most of which is jewellery. We¡¯re still trying to establish the exact amount stolen,¡± a police source told Agence France-Presse. He added that Kardashian West had flown out of France on Monday morning after giving a statement to police.The 35-year-old had been in Paris since last week for fashion week and had attended the Balenciaga show earlier on Sunday.
The reality star sat in the front row at the Givenchy show, with her sister Kourtney and their mother, Kris Jenner, in a show of support for their sister, Kendall Jenner, who was modelling in the presentation.
The family has been uncharacteristically silent on social media since the report involving Kardashian West.
Her husband, Kanye West, had abruptly ended his performance at the Meadows music and arts festival at Citi Field in New York on Sunday night. He stopped midway through his performance of Heartless, citing a ¡°family emergency¡±.
This was confirmed by the Meadows on Twitter.
Kardashian West is a prolific user of Twitter and Snapchat but, at the time of writing, she had not posted about the incident on social media.
However, her name was trending on Twitter and Facebook as the report of the robbery spread, with many initially casting doubt on the story.
The Carpool Karaoke host, James Corden, reminded those making fun of the reality star that she was a ¡°mother, a daughter, a wife, a friend¡±.
In a separate incident in Paris on Wednesday, Kardashian West was rushed by a man while getting out of her vehicle, prompting her security team to step in.
Vitalii Sediuk, a self-described ¡°entertainment Hollywood reporter¡± from Ukraine, had attempted to grab the model Gigi Hadid in Milan days earlier.
Kardashian West tweeted after the incident: ¡°My security [Pascal Duvier] is a G.¡±
On Sunday, before the incident reportedly took place, she had joked about Duvier crashing her paparazzi shots.
The private apartment where Kardashian West was staying, in a residence called the Hotel de Pourtales, was built in 1838 and is now a listed building. Its luxury apartments, in the chic 8th arrondissement of Paris, are popular with the wealthy and famous; past guests include Leonardo DiCaprio, Madonna, Prince and Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich.
Kardashian West and her husband are frequent visitors to Paris. In May 2014 they celebrated their marriage with several hundred guests at the Chateau de Versailles.
France has experienced some spectacular jewellery heists in recent years. In the biggest, items worth ¢æ103m were stolen from the Carlton hotel in Cannes in July 2013.
Nathalie Kosciusko-Morizet, leader of the opposition Les Republicains party in city hall, said the capital¡¯s Socialist administration was to blame for the Kardashian West attack.
¡°There¡¯s a great urgency over crime in Paris. You can do all the publicity you want around ¡®I love Paris¡¯ ¡¦ but it¡¯s all been brutally overshadowed by the Kim Kardashian affair that is on a loop on the news,¡± Kosciusko-Morizet told Europe 1 radio.
Condemning the attack and vowing that the perpetrators would soon be traced, Anne Hidalgo, the mayor of Paris, also hit back at those who were using the incident to ¡°create controversy¡± for political ends.
¡°This very rare incident, which took place in a private space, does not in any way call into question the work of police officers and security officers of Paris¡¯s public places,¡± she said.
Calling on politicians from all sides ¡°to act responsibly¡± in the period ahead of France¡¯s presidential election next year, she said that as Paris continued to struggle to recover from last year¡¯s terrorist attacks such criticism was unhelpful.
¡°When everyone¡¯s priority should be to boost the number of people coming [to Paris], using this incident to create controversy would directly hit the tourism sector and its 500,000 employees in the Ile-de-France region [around the capital].¡±
YouTube is promoting conspiracy theory videos claiming that the Las Vegas mass shooting was a hoax, outraging survivors and victims¡¯ families, in the latest case of tech companies spreading offensive propaganda.
It¡¯s only been days since a gunman inside the Mandalay Bay hotel opened fire on a music festival, killing 58 people and injuring nearly 500. But videos questioning whether the shooting really happened and claiming that the government has lied about basic facts have already garnered millions of views on YouTube and are continuing to run rampant.
It appears YouTube is actively helping these videos reach wide audiences. Searching for ¡°Las Vegas shooting videos¡± immediately leads to a wide range of viral videos suggesting that law enforcement and others have purposefully deceived the public. Some label the tragedy a ¡°false flag¡±, a term conspiracy theorists typically use to refer to mass shootings they say are staged by the government to advance gun control.
Stephen Melanson, whose wife and daughter were both shot in the attack, told the Guardian he believed YouTube should take down videos suggesting the deadliest mass shooting in modern US history had been faked.
¡°When I see my wife fighting for her life with a gunshot wound to her chest, and my daughter was also shot, it¡¯s pretty conclusive evidence that it did happen,¡± said Melanson, whose wife, two daughters and two friends escaped alive from the Route 91 Harvest festival on Sunday night. ¡°My daughter texted me ¡¦ ¡®There is a shooting right in front of us¡¯ and another text said, ¡®Mom is shot.¡¯¡±
One video on the first page of results on the Google-owned video platform Wednesday morning was called Las Vegas ¡®Shooting¡¯ ¡¦ Did It Actually Happen? and questioned whether the attack was ¡°fake¡± and if victims were ¡°actors¡±. It had more than 250,000 views after one day on the site.
YouTube told the Guardian that this footage and other specific conspiracy videos that appeared after a generic search did not violate its standards.
Complaints about YouTube enabling fake news follow reports that within hours of the tragedy, both Facebook and Google were actively promoting rightwing blogs and conspiracy sites, some misidentifying the shooter and claiming he was a Democrat who opposed Donald Trump. The proliferation of politicized propaganda comes as Silicon Valley corporations are facing increased scrutiny over their role in allowing false news to reach millions on their platforms, possibly assisting Russia¡¯s efforts to interfere in US politics.
Conspiracy theories about mass shootings are nothing new in America, but some fear YouTube¡¯s popularity and algorithms are exacerbating the problem. In addition to automatically suggesting Las Vegas conspiracy footage to people with basic search requests, YouTube has promoted a wide variety of fake related content to people who watch a single propaganda video.
That means for some, YouTube is not suggesting reputable media sources and instead is exposing them to dozens of videos painting a picture of a vast conspiracy.
After the Guardian watched one questionable video highlighted on the main Las Vegas shooting search page (from a gun rights advocate suggesting the facts didn¡¯t add up), YouTube promoted: ¡°Government Staged Las Vegas Mass Shooting¡± (215,000 views), ¡°PROOF: MEDIA & LAW ENFORCEMENT ARE LYING ABOUT THE VEGAS SHOOTING¡± (660,000 views) and ¡°PROOF Las Vegas shooting FALSE FLAG hoax¡± (70,000 views). The site automatically played a ¡°Las Vegas HOAX Exposed¡± video (150,000 views).
YouTube declined to comment on whether it has since removed footage, and it¡¯s unclear if the site has taken any measures to slow the spread of Las Vegas fake news.
¡°It¡¯s not a conspiracy. It¡¯s not a joke. It did happen. I was there,¡± said Krista Metz, a witness and survivor who said she was standing close to the stage when the gunshots began. The 45-year-old California woman and her cousin were nearly trampled and ended up running for miles to escape, she said. ¡°We literally thought we were going to die.¡±
Metz said she was frustrated with wild speculation online and in traditional news coverage: ¡°People are so crazy with their social media. They¡¯ll believe everything they read ¡¦ It¡¯s horrible.¡±
Even if YouTube and other sites remove the content, many have already viewed the videos ? and many more will continue to publish similar messages, Metz noted. ¡°There are so many people that post so many random things. How could they monitor it?¡±
¡°I just want the facts,¡± she added.
YouTube released a short statement touting its ability to promote ¡°thousands of news publishers that present a variety of viewpoints¡±, adding, ¡°When a major news event happens, these sources are presented on the YouTube homepage under ¡®Breaking News¡¯ and featured in search results, with the label ¡®Top News¡¯.¡±
¡°False flag¡± claims online can have devastating consequences for shooting survivors and families. The outspoken father of one of the children killed in the 2012 Sandy Hook elementary school shooting has faced frequent harassment and death threats from conspiracy theorists who believe the massacre was faked. One hoaxer who targeted him was recently sentenced to prison.
A woman who was badly injured in the Aurora theater shooting in Colorado also faced vicious online attacks and harassment, with critics trying to hack into her email account and accusing her of being a pawn in a gun control conspiracy.
Melanson ? whose family was rescued by a retired firefighter and whose wife remains in the hospital following a second surgery ? said he feared the propaganda on YouTube could impede law enforcement: ¡°It¡¯s hindering the investigation. They are creating false information that the authorities will still have to investigate. It really slows down the process.¡±
The videos also hurt victims and survivors already struggling to cope with trauma, he added: ¡°It¡¯s not fair to all the family members who have been going through this.¡±
A tense, six-hour standoff between armed police and Raoul Moat, Britain's most wanted man, ended early this morning when the fugitive shot himself.
At 1.15am a single gunshot was heard at the scene of the standoff and officers were reported to have surrounded Moat and jumped on him. In a statement, the police said "no shots were fired by police officers" and it "appears the suspect shot himself".
An ambulance reportedly sped from the scene, taking the former nightclub bouncer, 37, to a Newcastle hospital. He was pronounced dead at 2.20am.
Having evaded capture for almost a week, Moat had been surrounded by police snipers in the Northumberland village of Rothbury while he pointed a shotgun at his own neck.
He was wanted over the shooting of his ex-girlfriend Samantha Stobbart and the fatal shooting of her partner, Chris Brown, last Saturday, followed by the shooting of PC David Rathband on Sunday.
Just after 7pm yesterday Moat made a break from his hiding place near Cragside, about 300 metres from Rothbury. Witnesses described him walking along the bank of the River Coquet when two police officers approached him.
Within moments Moat was said to have gone down flat on his stomach and put a sawn-off shotgun to his neck, his finger apparently on the trigger. In seconds he was surrounded by 10 marksmen.
Trained police negotiators tried to talk with Moat, who was in a highly agitated state and shouting at officers who ordered him to lie on the ground.
Marksmen trained their guns and Tasers on him, while snipers lay on the banks of the river behind an armoured police vehicle. An RAF Tornado plane with infra-red equipment roared overhead.
As daylight faded, police sent in food and water to try to help develop a rapport. It was reported that Moat's friend Tony Laidler had arrived to try to assist with negotiations.
As torrential rain poured on the scene, the deadlock was broken at 1.15am when a single shot was heard, followed by the sound of shouting.
Peter Abiston was watching Moat throughout: "There are about 20 armed officers lying down pointing weapons at him. He looks very calm. It looks as though the police clearly have it under control."
Chris Robertson said he thought he had seen Moat holding a gun to his neck. "There was a man down by the river with what appeared to be a sawn-off shotgun pointing to his own neck. He was about 150 yards away. I wasn't sure it was Moat. Then the police came and pointed their rifles at him."
The temporary chief constable of Northumbria police, Sue Sim, said: "While the incident has been brought to a close we must be mindful of the impact it has had on many lives. Our thoughts are with the family and friends of those affected.
"I'd like to thank the public, particularly the community of Rothbury, for their continued help throughout the inquiry. This has been a difficult time for them and their support has been invaluable."
The force also confirmed that the incident had been referred to the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) because officers had had contact with Moat prior to his death.
The IPCC commissioner, Nicholas Long, said: "Early indications show that gunshots were not fired by police officers and this will of course form part of the IPCC independent investigation. It is also understood that a police officer did discharge a Taser and our investigation will also look at this."
Sim later confirmed that a stun gun had been fired, "however, this did not prevent [Moat's] death".
The independent police watchdog is already investigating whether Northumbria police took adequate action after they received a warning from Durham prison, following Moat's release on 1 July, that he might intend to cause serious harm to Stobbart.
Moat had remained at large for almost a week, allegedly aided by friends and associates. Six people have been arrested in connection with the investigation so far and two have already appeared before magistrates charged with conspiracy to commit murder and possession of a firearm.
Hundreds of officers were involved in the search, with 14 additional forces brought in, including 40 officers from the Metropolitan police's C019 sniper unit and 20 armoured police cars shipped in from Northern Ireland.
Throughout the inquiry, Northumbria police remained convinced Moat was in the area, despite cynicism as the search went on. Local sources believe Moat may have been sleeping rough in a storm drain that runs beneath the town.
In a surreal development, the former England and Newcastle footballer Paul Gascoigne turned up at the police cordon in an intoxicated state last night, claiming to be a friend of Moat and offering to give the fugitive assistance.
Moat's uncle, a former paratrooper, said that he also called police and offered to help negotiations.
Charles Alexander, 72, who served in the Paras for 18 years, said he was "the nearest thing [Moat] had to a father".
Mr Alexander, who now expects to have to identify his nephew's body, said: "I just can't believe it has come to this. I was praying he would hand himself in.
"What he has done is terrible, but he didn't deserve death. I just wish that police had let me go to him.
"I rang the police at 11 o'clock to ask them to take me to him as I knew I could make a difference. They brought one of his friends in but he was upset about family ? it was family he needed."
Mr Alexander added: "What is most upsetting is that now we'll never know why it happened and what made him crack."
The main approach to the town remains cut off today as police continue forensic work on the banks of the Coquet.
Apart from the site of the shooting, most police attention today was focussed on the large storm drain, or culvert, which threads under the centre of Rothbury, helping relieve the River Coquet after heavy rain. There is speculation that Moat may have used the storm drains to evade capture.
Shops and pubs in the village remain unusually quiet for a summer weekend with just a scattering of people in the High Street, overseen by dozens of police. The big difference is that none are armed, and the siege atmosphere of the last week has gone.
"It's just great to be able to bring the children down here to the town centre," said lawyer Helen Woodford, who moved to Rothbury two years ago with her husband Martin "for the peace and quiet". "Since then things have never stopped happening. Snow, floods and now, to cap everything, this."
Martin Woodford, also a lawyer, expressed relief at the end of the siege.
He said: "It's a relief, although sad that they didn't succeed in avoiding a death. We've found the police very good and helpful, though there are clearly questions to be asked about the investigation. But it's always easy to be critical with hindsight. Let's wait and see what the independent inquiry turns up."
Volunteers opened Rothbury United Reform church for the day, offering a steady flow of local people a cup of tea and the chance to share experiences and feelings about the week. One volunteer, William Flett, said: "We've come through because this is a very solid community."
He added: "The police were stunning. These were young people who had been told that they were being targeted, but they were endlessly cheerful as well as efficient. I think 99.9% of people in Rothbury will tell you that."
One of the British victims of the Tunisia terror attack was killed by gunshot wounds to the chest and abdomen, a coroner has heard.
An inquest was opened on Friday into the death of engineer Stephen Mellor from Bodmin in Cornwall.
He was killed as he shielded his wife, Cheryl, during the beach massacre a week ago. His wife survived the attack.
DS David Batt of the Metropolitan police counter-terrorism command told West London coroner¡¯s court: ¡°Cause of death was recorded as gunshot wounds to the chest and abdomen.¡±
Mellor¡¯s body had been identified by dental records, the hearing was told.
Chinyere Inyama, senior coroner, confirmed Mellor¡¯s body would be released to his family as the first inquest into the deaths of the British victims was adjourned to a date to be fixed.
Thirty Britons were among 38 victims killed by Seifeddine Rezgui when he opened fire in the resort of Sousse.
Chilling footage has emerged of ¡°war zone¡±-like scenes during last week¡¯s unrest at the Manus Island detention centre, showing dozens of asylum seekers ? most unconscious or semiconscious and many with serious injuries ? receiving treatment from frantic staff tending to them by torchlight.
The video, obtained by Guardian Australia, was filmed at the makeshift hospital created on a concrete wharf next to the floating accommodation block used by Australian detention centre staff. It is the first footage to be seen from the disturbance that left one man, Reza Barati, dead, one shot, and dozens wounded, 13 seriously.
The footage, shot in the early hours of Tuesday, after G4S personnel ¡°lost control¡± of their local riot squads and Papua New Guinea police were observed in violent altercations with asylum seekers, shows the injured brought in on a ute, one after another. The events occur in near darkness, with only a soft green light, torches and headlamps from the vehicles illuminating the makeshift hospital.
Some asylum seekers being treated at the scene can be heard groaning in pain. At one point a staff member shouts out the words ¡°gunshot wound¡± and a body is rushed through.
No asylum seekers can be seen at any point resisting staff, and one witness told Guardian Australia that at least one patient was observed with a plastic handcuff on one hand during the night.
¡°It was like a war zone,¡± a witness to the filmed events told Guardian Australia. ¡°People were covered in blood ? so many people came in half an hour.¡±
The footage was filmed between 12.41am and 1.06am on Tuesday. Almost immediately afterwards, witnesses say, all staff on the floating accommodation block, Hotel Bibby, were asked to help, whether or not they had medical training. At this point the number of casualties increased. ¡°The medics were short of staff. It was chaotic,¡± a witness said.
The wounded asylum seekers were separated into three areas: an assessment area, a critical area and a non-critical area, according to the witness.
At 12:58am one asylum seeker, a tall, muscular, young man can be seen being brought in for assessment and then moved instantly off for further treatment. His body is limp, hanging off the end of the stretcher. Guardian Australia has contacted a family member of Reza Barati, who said they could not identify the young man in the image.
¡°People were moaning, ¡®Papu, Papu¡¯ ? meaning local people,¡± said the witness to the filmed events.
Frantic staff can be heard during the continual arrivals. One shouts to a group seemingly running with a body, ¡°walking guys, walking¡±. Pools of liquid can be seen on the concrete. Blood and bruising is visible on many of the patients. A line of unused chairs rests in the assessment area, but all patients are treated on camp beds or blue mattresses.
On 18 February, the day after the unrest began, Guardian Australia reported witness accounts of the scenes at the staff accommodation block. One contractor told Guardian Australia: ¡°They were just makeshift beds. Transferees were carried in on sheets. Blood everywhere, crying. There were 30 or 40 clients down there. We had gunshot wounds, some with head injuries.¡±
The contractor took notes on what patients told her. One Iranian said: ¡°I did nothing, I wasn¡¯t involved in the protests, I was in my room, being good, trying to sleep. They came in my room ¡¦ they dragged me out of my bed and beat me. They had huge rocks in their hands and they hit my head and my body with them.¡±
An interpreter working for the Immigration Department, Azita Bokan, also said she saw asylum seekers with ¡°massive head injuries¡± at the makeshift hospital and said she saw one patient with a slashed throat.
British military doctors failed to give any pain relief to Iraqi insurgents with gunshot wounds ? although they did check their pulses and breathing before they were sent for interrogation, a public inquiry into allegations of murder and the abuse of unarmed prisoners by UK forces heard on Thursday.
One man who had three bullet wounds and several shrapnel wounds to his right leg and foot says he told an army doctor that he was "in agony", but his detention record showed that he received no analgesics. He later needed surgery.
Others with gunshot wounds, or injuries including cuts, bruises or broken noses that they say were inflicted after capture by British troops, say that they were medically examined before interrogation but not given pain relief.
Jonathan Acton Davis QC, counsel to the al-Sweady Inquiry, said that the records showed that men captured after a fierce battle near the town of Majar al-Kabir in south-east Iraq were weighed on arrival at the Shaibah logistics base, and that doctors also checked their pulses, respiration, body temperatures, analysed their urine for blood, glucose or protein, and even asked whether they had any allergies. They were then passed as being fit for detention, and sent for interrogation sessions, during which some are alleged to have been assaulted.
While photographs taken shortly afterwards suggested that some of the prisoners had not been assaulted with the severity they alleged, other pictures and medical records, did tend to support some of the claims, Acton Davis said.
Major David Winfield, the army doctor who examined the man with gunshot wounds who alleges he complained of being in great pain, has said that he would have given pain relief if requested. Nevertheless, said Acton Davis, the allegations made by the prisoners about their medical examinations would need to be investigated by the inquiry.
The inquiry, which was ordered more than three years ago, also heard that the Ministry of Defence was yet to hand over a key document: the operation directive governing the interrogation centre known as the joint forward interrogation team (JFIT) at the time that the men were being held there for questioning.
This document was needed to establish the orders governing British military interrogators, who are alleged to have been involved in the torture of some detainees. "We lack one of the critical yardsticks against which to measure the conduct alleged against some of the interrogators," Acton Davis said.
Furthermore, several JFIT interrogators had not yet provided the inquiry with a signed statement, several months after they had been requested to do so, he said.
The inquiry has heard that there is a "stark dispute" between the former detainees, and the relatives of up to 20 men said to have been killed unlawfully at a separate British military base called Camp Abu Naji, and the Ministry of Defence, which insists that there was no mistreatment and no killings.
The inquiry was established after a number of former prisoners and relatives brought proceedings in the high court in London, demanding an independent investigation in line with the requirements of the European Convention on Human Rights. The need for the inquiry was accepted in November 2009 by the then defence secretary, Bob Ainsworth, after high court judges accused the MoD of "lamentable" behaviour and "serious breaches" of its duty of candour during the court proceedings.
The inquiry, which is named after Hamid al-Sweady, a 19-year-old alleged victim, will hear evidence from around 60 Iraqi witnesses, in London and Beirut, and from up to 200 military witnesses. It is unlikely to report before the end of next year.
Acton Davis said the first responsibility of the inquiry would be to attempt to establish whether 20 Iraqi men were killed during the battle in May 2004 and their corpses taken Camp Abu Naji ? as the Ministry of Defence insists was the case ? or whether they were captured alive and then unlawfully killed during 14 and 15 May 2004.
In addition, the inquiry will examine allegations that five men taken prisoner following the same battle were mistreated at the large British logistics base at Shaibah, which was JFIT.
Liam Walsh perches on the work surface in his kitchen on a slow Friday afternoon in Halifax and tries to lick his lips. But his tongue looks as dry as a lizard in a desert. The unbeaten Walsh shakes his head, and it is hard not to be moved by a little-known fighter whose personal story is the most harrowing in British boxing.
Walsh's family has been ravaged by drug addiction and prison for two decades; and he has survived being shot. Now, full of courage and hope, and believing he may be on the brink of transformation just hours before his first televised bout, the 29-year-old grins at his futile attempt to generate some moisture in his mouth.
"Your eyes start getting bloodshot and you really feel the headaches," Walsh says. "I had a cup of tea yesterday morning round about six. And nothing since then. No water. No food. And nothing until the weigh-in this evening. By the time that's done it'll be near 36 hours."
He gazes at a chicken pasta bake, his favourite dish, that his fiancee, Sarah, has made for him to devour once he has stood on the scales and dipped under the 10st 3lb mark agreed for his light-welterweight contest against a journeyman called Michael Frontin. It is Friday 11 November 2011. Tonight will mark the ninth time Walsh will step into the professional ring, having switched to boxing from rugby league, a sport he was good enough at to play for Ireland, a country with which he has distant family links. Boxing feels deadly serious now.
Yet Walsh has spent the week working 12-hour shifts as an electrician. Having been out of work last month, he had no option but to accept a 13-week contract with an engineering firm in Huddersfield. The money will help him, Sarah and their young son, Oscar, over Christmas. Walsh has sold 700 tickets himself to the sold-out show at the North Bridge Leisure Centre in Halifax ? where he is a local celebrity. All afternoon his phone buzzes and people rap on his back door as they try to buy the few spares he has left. Walsh receives only 10% of each ticket sale. The rest goes to the local promoter who is staging the bill in conjunction with Frank?Warren.
Tension is etched into Walsh's gaunt face. I know how much this fight means to him because all week he has burned with anticipation, and some trepidation, at the prospect of live television and national attention. "It's daunting," he says, "and I never like this time, when you're waiting to fight."
When Walsh turned professional in March 2010 it seemed typical of his fate that he could not use his own name. "Another Liam Walsh [a super-featherweight] turned pro before me. My full name is Liam Patrick Walsh ? so I have to fight under the name of Patrick Liam Walsh. I couldn't believe it."
Walsh has confronted more in his troubled past than many ordinary people have faced in all their lives put together. We both want to avoid talking about everything that has happened to him this close to the fight, when his mind should be clear, but darkness seeps from even innocent observations. In his kitchen, a small board counts down the days left to Christmas. Last Friday, the board confirmed it would be Christmas in another 43 days.
The fighter cackles. "Sarah's crazy about Christmas. But we never had Christmas when I was a kid."
There is neither bitterness nor sentimentality in Walsh's voice. "With the family I've got," he says, "that was normal. It's different now. I've got Sarah and Oscar. I want him to believe in Christmas."
That desire gave Walsh the courage to attend college in his mid-20s to qualify as an electrician. He needed to overcome deep insecurities because he had been to the most infamous school in England, the Ridings, officially declared "the worst in the country" in the 1990s. When Walsh was a pupil at the Ridings, the corridors were patrolled by policemen. "I didn't mind it," Walsh says. "I got fed at?school."
Walsh pauses, as if looking at his own childhood with sudden clarity. "My mum and step-dad, Vijay, a lovely Asian man, became addicts 25 years ago, when other people in Halifax hardly knew about drugs. They were on heroin and used to smoke it through the foil. I can still smell it a mile off ¡¦ it's the smell of my childhood. I was six when they started. My mum used to take me and my sister Lisa to the Bradford supermarkets and we'd do a Trolley Dash. Mum would say: 'What do you want?' We'd shove it in the trolley and make a mad dash for it. I loved it. Mum and Vij were like Bonnie and Clyde. But, yeah, they were in and out of jail all the time.
"When I was a kid my mum had a ¡Ì300-¡Ì400-a-day habit ? on crack and heroin. But she'd still try and sort me and Lisa out. She loved us. Same with Vijay. He was on drugs, but he was good to me. Vijay was still a nutter. He'd go up to the dealers and, when he didn't have the money, he'd take the drugs off 'em and that brought trouble to the house. Vijay came back one night and he had half his face sliced down the middle. I was 10 and I opened the door and said: 'Oh my God, Vij!' He'd robbed these drug dealers from Chapeltown in Leeds and they'd cut his face with a Samurai sword. But Vij survived."
The resilient Vijay also survived a fight in which he was hit repeatedly by a baseball bat. "Vij was on his deathbed and, aged 11, I used to catch the bus to see him in hospital," Walsh says. "He was all stapled up and I'd think: 'He's going to die.' But one day he came home in his hospital gown. He had a Zimmer frame because he couldn't walk. He'd got out of his bed, ripped all the wires off him and got home because he couldn't bear being without me mum."
Vijay is now clean: but Hilda Walsh is still locked in the grip of crack. "I'm glad Vijay sorted himself out," Walsh says. "He owns his own shop now and loves working. Vij still loves my mum but he can't live with her because drugs are her way of life. I've tried and tried to help but it's no use. If my mum came off drugs I think it would kill her. A doctor described her body as an orange. It looks OK from the outside. But you know when you open an orange and it's all black and ruined inside? That's my mum."
When he was a little boy, dealers used to hammer on the door of Walsh's cracked-up home demanding money. "I wasn't scared. I've always been a brave boy. At the time, when all this was going on, my dad had his own family. I don't blame my dad for leaving my mum when I was just a baby really. She was wild."
After Sarah kisses him goodbye, we slip out into the dark and head for his father's house. Pat Walsh trains his son, and will work his corner tonight. Liam carries his bottle of liquid and a Tupperware box filled with Sarah's meal. He tells me how much his father loves him and how wounded Pat is by the past.
Pat is warm towards me, and gentle with Liam. We go down into the stone cellar which has been turned into a gym. Here, father and son work towards the dream of a happy and lucrative future together in boxing. Liam's friend, Shuzzy Hussain, a charming former drug dealer now fighting at light-heavyweight, joins us. On a bill headlined by the heavyweight Dereck Chisora but dominated by the local hero, Walsh, Shuzzy will feature in the second fight.
Liam looks jittery with need. But, having avoided his mum's drug-strewn path, he needs only water and food. We walk to the venue where the weigh-in will also be held. Cold fog has swept down from the Pennines and settled in a murky blanket across Halifax. The two fighters and their trainer lead the way, crossing the bridge which they say is used by people intent on killing themselves in Halifax.
Relief comes when, stepping off the scales 2lbs under the designated weight, Walsh drinks deeply from his bottle. "I can feel it going into my insides," he says, assuring me he can rehydrate safely within an hour. Once his pasta bake has been eaten, and colour returns to his cheeks, there is little left to do but wait. Walsh paces a large room shared with seven other fighters. As the hours tick by he is touchingly polite, checking regularly that I'm not too bored or weary.
But there is no tedium in this wait. Instead, there is concern and a little fear. Liam and I step outside, into the heaving arena, to watch Shuzzy fight. As in his only previous bout, Shuzzy edges the first three rounds before being knocked down in the fourth and final session. He hauls himself to his feet and fights back ? only for his face to crumple in misery when the decision goes against him.
"Fuck it, Shuz," Walsh says in the changing room as the female doctor examines his friend, "you had him."
Shuzzy nods mournfully, unable to speak. Walsh and I retreat to a corner. "I don't want to let anyone down," he says.
Finally, there is another knock on the door. This is the call for Walsh, and the fight of the night. He looks as if he is about to face the hangman, and he nods when I wish him luck. But I also remember the story of how, in 2004, he had been shot after "a scrap" with the biggest drug-dealer in Halifax, a man who had supplied Walsh's mother with most of her drugs. Walsh had nearly lost his life when the dealer fired at him repeatedly with a 9mm gun. He took a bullet in the upper right arm he used to shield himself from the gunfire. His attacker was sent to jail for 15 years on a conviction of attempted murder and now, as Walsh walks to the ring, the great dent of a scar in his arm looks pale in the glaring light.
They chant his name as we walk: "Walshie ¡¦ Walshie ¡¦" A few feet behind Walsh, his terrible loneliness and vulnerability hits me. Walsh ducks between the ropes and I take my safe seat at ringside. A few rows away, Hilda Walsh is about to watch her son box for the first time.
The fight begins and Frontin is surprisingly slippery. He may be a journeyman but, at ringside, the astute John Rawling, commentating on the bout, suggests that Frontin has the ambition of a fighter "who fancies this one". Walsh is winning but, beset by nerves, he is more frenetic than usual. Then, in the fifth round, Frontin steadies him with a hard right. A swelling rises up over Walsh's eye and his fiancee and mother scream louder. His dad crouches in the corner, watching and?fretting.
And then, as if all the whirling memories of his past are churning inside him, Walsh goes to work on Frontin. In the eighth and last round, and clearly ahead, Walsh backs his opponent against the ropes. His combinations are withering and hurtful. Frontin buckles and is only saved by the bell.
Everyone is on their feet, except me and Rawling it seems, shouting Walsh's name as the referee holds his gloved hand high in the air. On television monitors the analysts compare Walsh with Ricky Hatton ? in the way he fights and dredges up such fervour in his followers.
In the changing room, glistening with sweat and the marks of battle, Walsh takes me to one side. He tells me how worried he has been all week. It's easy to tell Walsh how I haven't felt this concerned about the fate of a fighter for years.
"Well," he says, his eyes shining as Sarah hugs him, "I won again. I'm 9 and 0 now."
At his after-party, held at The Shay, Halifax's rugby and football stadium, I spend the next three hours getting mildly drunk with the Walsh family. I talk to Liam and Sarah and Lisa, his sister, who lived through the same darkness but now works as an inspirational drugs counsellor in Halifax.
Liam and Lisa's mother, Hilda, has dressed up for the occasion. She looks smart but haunted. Hilda glances away from me, and Liam explains softly that his mother is ashamed of the damage that years of crack have done to her teeth. But, in the end, she takes my hand and lifts her lowered eyes. I can see the abuse she has endured but I can also see a mother, almost crying with fleeting happiness. "I'm so proud of Liam," she says.
Early the following morning, after Walsh has texted me to say he has been unable to sleep all night, I go back to his house and repeat his mum's words. He nods quietly. "It meant the world to me: that my mum was there. The whole family were. Dad, Mum, Lisa and Sarah. Amazing."
We sit alone in his kitchen. Walsh, sometimes touching his cuts and bruises, talks of the past but, now, he also allows himself to dream of the future, of fighting full-time, of being sponsored and promoted properly, of making a new life that, once, he would never have believed possible. "It feels different today," Walsh says. "It feels like I've got a real chance now ¡¦"
The Virginia gunman who shot and killed two journalists has died as the result of a self-inflicted gunshot wound, Franklin County sheriff Bill Overton confirmed at a press conference on Wednesday afternoon. Vester Lee Flanagan, a 41-year-old former employee of the news station WDBJ7, opened fire on a news crew from the station early this morning, sparking a police chase that ended in Markham, Fauquier County
It¡¯s a commonly held belief among pro-gun advocates that more guns make us safer. On Friday, it came to light that one of the most famous proponents of this belief ? John Lott, author of The War on Guns ? had fudged his data. This is no surprise to me. I know that, when you are being shot at, your first thought is to run away ? not shoot back. Any claims to the contrary were always bound to be wrong.
When I was 18 years old, a dear friend of mine ? we¡¯ll call her Katie ? was in the process of breaking up with an ex-soldier who had been sectioned out of the army and was a bartender at a strip club. One night, while he was at work, she asked me to come help her move the last of her things out of his apartment.
We were at the end of the task, making the last trips to my battered red Subaru sedan when the boyfriend ? we¡¯ll call him Mike ? unexpectedly came home. He was drunk and angry and had the wild-eyed, blown-out-pupils look of someone who has consumed large amounts of speed or cocaine.
¡°Who the fuck are you?¡± he demanded of me. He asked if I had been sleeping with his girlfriend.
Katie told him to leave us alone and let us get out of there. ¡°I don¡¯t want to call the police and you don¡¯t want me to, either,¡± she said.
They left the room for a moment to argue in the kitchen. I kept putting records into a crate, my heart pounding in my ears and my hands shaking. I was worried he would try to hit one or both of us.
Moments later, Katie exploded through the kitchen door, white as a sheet.
¡°He¡¯s got a gun!¡± she said. ¡°Run!¡±
We ran out of there as fast as we could. I was halfway to the car when I heard the first gunshot. I hit the dirt and frantically scrambled along the ground, crab-walking to the open driver¡¯s side door.
¡°Get in the back seat!¡± I shouted at Katie rather than having her run around the car to the passenger side and expose herself to more gunfire.
CRACK! CRACK! Two more gunshots sounded and two windows on the car parked next to mine blew out.
With wildly shaking hands that felt like slick, cold balloons, I jammed the key into the ignition and peeled out of the apartment complex parking lot, leaving a trail of hot tire rubber on the asphalt.
Later that night, before the police came, Mike died by suicide. By then, Katie and I had filed a police report, meeting officers at the Denny¡¯s where all of us punk rock and goth kids and other misfits hung out at all hours of the night.
I remember sitting and talking to the kind-eyed female police officer, still shaking, my hand wrapped around a boiling-hot mug of Denny¡¯s coffee, but still freezing cold. My voice sounded to me like it was coming through a tinny speaker somewhere far away. My chest ached from where my heart had lurched, then pounded wildly when my brain dumped adrenaline into my system.
There was no feeling of ¡°exhilaration¡± ? just a cold, spent-adrenaline state of after-shock, a bitter acid taste in my mouth and the sick realization of how close I had come to dying.
Too many people who shouldn¡¯t have guns in this country have not just a sidearm or a hunting rifle, but whole arsenals at their command. This is a fact. Sadly, as the evidence shows, only a tiny fraction of these guns will ever be used for home defense. They are much more likely to be used for suicide or against a family member in a domestic dispute or they will kill or injure someone when they fire accidentally.
Sadly, I think too many Americans believe what they see on TV, that when the powder ignites and hot lead begins to fly, everything will slow down into The Matrix-style slow motion and they will be able to magically dodge bullets and shoot fast-moving human targets with a marksman¡¯s precision. Guns are not toys. They are machines designed for the express purpose of killing. And the stories we tell ourselves about them making us safer are just daydreams that have little to no application in a real life-or-death crisis.
Pushing through the emergency department's rubber-coated swing doors, Dr Luiz Sergio Verbicaro threw open his arms as if welcoming guests to his new home.
Before him a huddle of bored-looking medics made small talk around a table in a corner of the otherwise empty department. Outside, the ambulance bay was deserted.
"It is good ? and abnormal," said Verbicaro, 60, a veteran surgeon and the director of the Getulio Vargas hospital in northern Rio de Janeiro, until recently considered the Latin American champion in gunshot wound cases. "It is a relief."
Once upon a time, the flow of bloodied and disfigured gunshot victims made the Getulio Vargas team a global reference point in bullet wound treatment ? a ghoulish case study in the devastating impact of guns; a warzone hospital, without the war. More than 3,000 cases have been admitted in the last five years, an average of 50 a month. In 2007, the most violent year on record, 767 bullet-wound victims were brought in. Last year there were 583.
"It reached a point where on a 12-hour weekend shift ¡¦ we'd receive an average of five gunshot victims. That was our routine," said Verbicaro, an Air Force reservist, whose hospital is flanked by what were until recently some of South America's most violent slums. "Often we couldn't even leave the hospital ¡¦ because of shoot-outs."
But not any more. Doctors say a fledgling government drive to "pacify" Rio's slums ? by ridding every favela of heavily armed drugs gangs by the time the city hosts the 2016 Olympics ? has sent the number of gunshot patients into freefall.
In the wake of a massive military operation in November, in which security forces stormed and permanently occupied two vast favelas near the hospital, the number of bullet wound admissions at Getulio Vargas has dropped almost 50%. In February there were 29 cases of what doctors call "PAFs" ? firearm perforations. In the first 11 days of March there were just four.
"Compared with how things were it is fantastic: what we used to get in one week we are now getting in one month," said Dr Maria Cristina Lopes, head of the emergency department.
"Victims were arriving around the clock. It wasn't just at night or on weekends ? it was every day. Since the occupation the drop has been very noticeable."
The calm came at a price. In November, when over 1,600 members of the security forces swept into the shantytowns, clashing with traffickers, 94 gunshot victims were admitted, among them a Reuters photographer and Rosangela Barbosa Alves, a 14-year-old student who was shot in the chest in a gunfight near her home.
Lopes, who watched her team fight in vain to save Alves, said she had been the last child brought in with a gunshot injury. "There's nothing worse than seeing a child die of a stray bullet," she said. "Children are not born to die children."
Even now the department is not a place for the faint-hearted. Victims of motorway crashes are common and horrific gunshot injuries continue to appear, albeit with less frequency. Earlier, the surgeons treated a 32-year-old man who was rushed in by highway police with multiple gunshots to the head and chest. "Liver injury. Chest drain. Jaw fracture," listed Verbicaro, leafing through the patient's sky-blue medical chart. "He's OK. It must have been a pistol."
But the changes are palpable. During the Guardian's last visit to the hospital, in 2008, 12 victims had been carried into the so-called "Red Room", including a three-year-old boy with shrapnel wounds, a policeman with burns to his face from a hand grenade and a 21-year-old man, shot in the head and bundled through the hospital's guarded entrance in a blood-stained duvet.
This time, Verbicaro toured the hospital showing off recent improvements ? a new lick of paint, a new chapel for family members, a new tomography machine.
Asked what she expected from the rest of her shift, Lopes replied: "Tranquillity."
The 46-year-old paediatrician even hoped that the hospital's calmer routine might help her quit smoking.
"I'll get there," she said, an almost full pack lying on her desk. "As the stress levels go down so will the quantity of cigarettes."
The Counted is a special Guardian project to record all people killed by police in the United States this year.
We have gathered information from official databases and crowdsourced counts to create a full and detailed view of killings by law enforcement agents in the US.
This page shows the names and, where possible, faces of those killed since January 1 2015, as well as other details about the manner of their deaths and the status of any investigations into the incidents.
You can see these incidents mapped throughout the United States, and read more about the methodology of the project here.
We are actively searching for more information about many of these cases. If you have anything you can share with us, you can send us details by clicking here and filling in the form. You do not have to share identifying information about yourself.
You can also join our community on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to keep track of The Counted and share more information.
 The first time Isiah was shot he was hit three times, once in the chest. A group of strangers had pulled up to his car and started firing. The second was the result of a dispute between two groups at a club. Isiah was leaving the club and saw some of the men who had been arguing. Telling his date to go back inside, he started to drive away and was shot in the arm.
AT 1000C IN WASHSHASH VILLAGE (ZONE 28 ) IVO 38SMB 36550 89900 CENTURION 2-1, 17 OCT O6, 1930 hrs
LINE 2: 3rd HURRYAH MB 36550 89900
LINE 3: 1 X LN, NAMES: [xxxxx], SEX: MALE, AGE: 70YRS OLD
LINE 4: UNKNOWN
LINE 5: UNKNOWN
LINE 6: GSW TO THE HEAD
LINE 7: FOUND LYING IN THE STREET
LINE 8: UNKNOWN
LINE 9: BODY FOUND BY LN AT 171000. AND DROPPED OFF AT KHADRA IP STATION.
SUMMARY:1 X MURDER EVENT
1 X LN KIA
CLOSED.
AL ZOHOUR POLICE REPORT HAVING FOUND A MALE CORPSE SHOT IN THE HEAD. THE REMAINS OF MR FRAIDOON ABDUL KAREEM SAAD WERE TAKEN TO JUSTICE MEDICAL.
A gunman killed a man before turning the gun on himself in a murder-suicide that prompted thousands of students to barricade themselves in classrooms at the University of California, Los Angeles.
The shooter opened fire in an office in an engineering building just before 10am on Wednesday, triggering a campus lockdown and citywide tactical alert by police, who responded with helicopters, Swat teams and armored vehicles.
Several media outlets identified the victim as William Klug, 39, an associate professor of mechanical and aerospace engineering. Colleagues paid tribute to the father of two as a talented academic and generous colleague.
A reporter for the radio station KNX quoted a law enforcement source saying the shooter was a student upset about his grades.
The gunman killed the victim, then himself, the Los Angeles police department chief, Charlie Beck, said during a news conference. ¡°The method of suicide is gunshot wound. Many many questions are unanswered at this point ¡¦ there is evidence there that could be a suicide note.¡±
Authorities did not immediately identify the two dead men or cite a possible motive.
Hours after the incident, hundreds of law enforcers from the campus police, LAPD, FBI and Santa Monica continued to scour the area but the emergency was over, Beck said. ¡°The campus is now safe.¡±
Andy Neiman, an LAPD spokesman, invoked mass shootings elsewhere to explain the massive response. ¡°In this day and age ¡¦ we would much rather respond in an abundance of caution.¡±
Josh Earnest, a White House spokesman, said Barack Obama was informed of the shooting aboard Air Force One, a sign of the alarm and political sensitivity over gun violence.
The campus alert sounded when students reported hearing gunshots in the Engineering IV building near Boelter Hall. A 911 call activated campus police, the force¡¯s chief, James Herren, said at a news conference.
¡°We immediately put out a Bruin alert ? that¡¯s our campus alert notification system ? to advise all of those in our campus community of an incident that occurred that could be dangerous to them. And we requested them to stay out of the area.¡±
Students and staff hid and barricaded themselves in classrooms and offices. Some posted images on social media of doors secured with belts and makeshift barricades. ¡°Using my belt to lock the door down,¡± tweeted Carrie Rapaport.She chided those who ignored her tweet warning against phoning. ¡°I said DO NOT CALL.¡±
Many of those barricaded communicated with reporters and friends only via text in accordance with UCLA protocol advising against speaking on phones during certain emergencies.
Helicopter news footage showed other students filing out, some running, with hands raised over their heads. Heavily armed police directed and searched them.
The campus newspaper the Daily Bruin tweeted that the shooter was wearing a black jacket and black pants. The newspaper¡¯s site briefly crashed from traffic overload.
A law enforcement source told the Los Angeles Times that, based on the appearances of the deceased, police believed that a man young enough to be a student shot a professor, then turned the gun on himself.
University authorities lifted the lockdown at 12.05pm and cancelled classes for the rest of the day.
The family of a Connecticut teenager who was shot and killed by police last Tuesday say they have been lied to by officers about how he died, after bystander footage filmed at the scene was made public over the weekend.
¡°We weren¡¯t given the truth. We were lied to from the moment the incident happened,¡± said Giovanni Rivera, a relative of the victim, 15-year-old Jayson Negron.
Police in Bridgeport fired into the car Negron was driving after, they said, he backed his vehicle into an officer and refused calls to stop. Police say the car was stolen.
Rivera said police told him and other family members that Negron was struck in the head by an officer¡¯s bullet and died instantly.
But Rivera said a video he uploaded to social media, taken by a bystander, raised questions about how Negron died. A figure, thought to be Negron, can be seen handcuffed, lying on the ground, as an officer stands over his body.
The shaky video pans away from Negron¡¯s body for a moment, and when it returns a few seconds later, Negron¡¯s head is facing in the other direction. Negron¡¯s body was left on the pavement for upwards of six hours before being removed. Police attributed this to ¡°evidence-gathering¡±.
¡°Nobody called an ambulance. Nobody treated his wounds. They let him bleed out on the concrete,¡± Rivera said.
Negron died from a gunshot wound to the chest, according to a postmortem.
Rivera said he received the video from a friend of the family who saw the incident but wanted to remain anonymous. ¡°Bridgeport is a very small town, everybody knows everybody, and this happened on one of our busiest streets. A lot of people were there,¡± Rivera said.
Negron was the son of Rivera¡¯s cousin, making Negron Rivera¡¯s first cousin once removed. Rivera told the Guardian that the two were close and that he used to babysit Negron when he was younger. He has been the primary spokesperson for the family since the shooting.
The police department did not respond to a request for comment.
A spokesperson for Bridgeport¡¯s mayor, Joseph Ganim, said the mayor found it ¡°unacceptable¡± that it had taken police so long to move the body from the scene, but declined any further comment.
State police officials, who are handling the investigation, said the vehicle Negron was driving failed to stop when officers tried to pull it over and eventually traveled the wrong way down a busy street, striking several vehicles.
James Boulay has been identified by police as the officer who was struck by Negron¡¯s vehicle, and the one who fired the fatal shots. A passenger in Negron¡¯s car, 21-year-old Julian Fyffe, was also struck but did not sustain life-threatening injuries. Two Bridgeport police officers sustained minor injuries as well.
At least 26 people have been killed and many more injured after a man walked into a Baptist church in Sutherland Springs, Texas, on Sunday and opened fire on worshippers.
The number of dead at the First Baptist church in the small town 30 miles south-east of San Antonio made the killing the worst mass shooting in modern Texas history and one of the worst gun rampages in recent years. The lone shooter was found dead after he was chased by locals and police across county lines.
¡°There are so many families who have lost family members, and it occurred in a church, in a place of worship,¡± the Texas governor, Greg Abbott, in a Sunday evening press conference. ¡°That¡¯s where these people were mown down. We mourn their loss.¡±
Twenty-three worshippers died inside the church, two outside and one after being taken to hospital. Many more injured were still being treated. The ages of the dead ranged from five to 72.
Law enforcement officials at the press conference did not name the gunman, though his name was reported as Devin Patrick Kelley elsewhere. The Air Force said Kelley, 26, served from 2010 to 2014 when he left following a court martial. He received a bad conduct discharge for assaulting his wife and child. Kelley lived in the town of New Braunfels, about 35 miles from Sutherland Springs. On Sunday night, police were at the property.
Freeman Martin of the Texas department of public safety gave a brief timeline of events. At about 11.20am, he said, the suspect, described as a white male in his early 20s, was seen at a gas station over the road from the church.
He was dressed all in black in tactical-style clothes including a ballistic vest. He crossed the road and as he approached the church he began shooting, carrying on the firing as he entered the place of worship itself.
After the carnage, as he was leaving the church, he was engaged by a local resident carrying a rifle. The shooter dropped his own weapon, a Ruger assault rifle, and fled.
He was pursued by police and just as he reached Guadalupe County his vehicle veered off the road. He was found in the car dead, it is not known whether by his own hand or having been shot by a local resident.
The scale of the shooting, and its location in a Baptist church in the south, presented Donald Trump with a renewed gun dilemma just as he embarked on a five-country tour in Asia.
Asked at a press conference in Tokyo what policies he would support to tackle mass shootings, the president focused on the mental health of the perpetrator and claimed that gun ownership was not a factor.
¡°We have a lot of mental health problems in our country, as do other countries, but this isn¡¯t a guns situation,¡± Trump said. ¡°Fortunately somebody else had a gun that was shooting in the opposite direction, otherwise it wouldn¡¯t have been as bad as it was, it would have been much worse.
¡°This is a mental health problem at the highest level. It¡¯s a very sad event ¡¦ these are great people at a very, very sad event, but that¡¯s the way I view it.¡±
The shooting led to dramatic scenes in the tiny community of Sutherland Springs. A local television station, KSAT, reported that two Airlife helicopters were on hand to take victims to hospitals. At least 10 were taken to Connally Memorial Medical Center in Floresville. Eight others were sent to the Brooke Army Medical Center in San Antonio.
Witnesses reported hearing a rapid barrage of about 20 gunshots. ¡°It was very close,¡± Carrie Matula, who had been working in a store across the street, told CNN. ¡°It was semi-automatic, rapid fire. This is just devastating in a small town like this.¡±
Pastor Frank Buford of the neighbouring River Oaks church, a few blocks away, said relatives of victims had started to congregate at a makeshift community centre. ¡°We¡¯re holding up as well as we can ? we are a strong community, we are strong in our faith,¡± he told local reporters.
Buford described Sutherland Springs, which has only about a few hundred residents, as a close-knit community. ¡°We have a post office, two churches and a dollar store,¡± he said. His church received word that a shooting was under way at their sister place of worship. ¡°We started praying for everyone involved,¡± he said.
The pastor of First Baptist, Frank Pomeroy, and his wife Sherri were out of town when the shooting happened. In a text to Associated Press, Sherri Pomeroy said their 14-year-old daughter had died inside the church. She added that she had also lost ¡°many friends¡± in the massacre.
The shooting comes a month after a gunman opened fire on an open-air concert in Las Vegas, leaving 58 dead and 546 injured. After that, Trump showed himself to be reluctant to get involved in the debate around gun control, limiting himself to sending his prayers to the victims and their families.
That was in stark contrast to the rapid and virulent response he had to the truck attack in New York last week, where eight people were mowed down by a driver inspired by the terrorist group Isis. After that attack, Trump called for a crackdown on immigration rules.
As the FBI and local law enforcers begin to piece together what happened, it is possible they will be assisted by the church¡¯s own video footage. First Baptist was in the habit of recording all its Sunday services and posting them on YouTube.
The recordings capture a homely, small church with many small children in attendance, copious flowers and plenty of singing to the accompaniment of electric and acoustic guitars. On one recent Sunday a Harley-Davidson motorbike was parked in front of the altar.
On Sunday evening, reporters and locals gathered on the edge of a police cordon about 50 metres from the church, whose sign was still advertising a ¡°fall festival¡± from 31 October.
Struggling for words, David Johnson, whose daughter used to live opposite the church, said he was stunned such violence would be wreaked upon a small, quiet community ? but that the scale of the violence would be horrific in any context.
¡°This is a shock anywhere that it would happen,¡± he said.
Afraid to leave her barricaded home on the outskirts of Benghazi, a student blogger and member of Libya's youth protest movement sat shaking as she described the violence unleashed on the Mediterranean city in five days of demonstrations against the Libyan regime.
"I've seen violent movies and video games that are nothing compared to this. I can hear gunshots, helicopters circling overhead, then I hear the voices screaming. I can hear the screeching of four-by-fours in the street. No one has that type of car except his [Gaddafi's] people," she told the Guardian by phone, occasionally crying. "My brother went to get bread, he's not back; we don't know if he'll get back. The family is up all night every night, keeping watch, no one can sleep."
The student, an expert in subverting net censorship, had regularly posted messages online to gather support for protests that began last week, but now her internet connection is down, landlines cut off, mobile coverage interrupted, electricity sporadically cut off and the house plunged into darkness. "There are even stories here that he [Gaddafi] has poisoned the water, so we dare not drink. If he could cut off the air that we breathe, he would."
She was still afraid to utter Muammar Gaddafi's name over the phone but said that now hundreds of protesters had been killed in Benghazi, Libya's second city, people's fear was ebbing away and they were talking openly of revolution.
"Now people are dying we've got nothing else to live for. What needs to happen is for the killing to stop. But that won't happen until he is out. We just want to be able to live like human beings. Nothing will happen until protests really kick off in Tripoli, the capital. It's like a pressure cooker. People are boiling up inside. I'm not even afraid any more. Once I wouldn't have spoken at all by phone. Now I don't care. Now enough is enough."
Benghazi, 620 miles east of Tripoli, has always been a bastion of opposition to Gaddafi's 40-year regime, with residents complaining they have seen little of Libya's wealth from the largest oil riches in Africa. But , as doctors gave details of more than 200 unarmed civilians killed by large-calibre automatic weapons, there was a feeling that the uprising had turned a corner and that the state-organised violence would bring more people out on to the streets in outrage.
Protests began in the city last Tuesday night but escalated over the weekend as demonstrators periodically came under attack from security forces firing out of their high-walled compound. As thousands gathered for funeral corteges to bury the dead, the mourners' processions passing the city's barracks were fired on. Unarmed protesters were reported to have attacked the barracks with stones and some petrol bombs. They were reportedly fired on with automatic weapons.
One local doctor, Brayka, told the BBC a massacre was under way in the city. "Ninety per cent of these gunshot wounds [were] mainly in the head, the neck, the chest, mainly in the heart," she said. A Benghazi resident describing the demonstrations and funeral processions on Saturday said: "A massacre took place." He said security forces had used heavy weapons, adding: "Many soldiers and policemen have joined the protesters." Another resident described a crowd of 10,000 protesters heading for a cemetery "to bury dozens of martyrs".
On Sunday thousands of people, including women and children, came out on to the seafront and vast crowds gathered near Benghazi's northern courthouse as ritual prayers were recited in front of 60 bodies laid out. "The protesters are here until the regime falls," one demonstrator told Reuters. A tribal figure said security forces were confined to their compound. "The state's official presence is absent in the city and the security forces are in their barracks and the city is in a state of civil mutiny."
With no foreign media or local journalists allowed into the city and phonelines down, information was hard to verify. The dead were said to be mainly aged between 13 and 35,, although one 80-year-old was reportedly killed, according to doctors interviewed by French and UK TV.
Libya's al-Yawn website quoted a doctor who claimed 285 people were dead in Benghazi alone. There was confusion over who was firing at the crowds. Automatic fire was believed to have come from elite security forces. Several residents suggested mercenaries from neighbouring countries such as Chad had been paid to shoot demonstrators. "They are wearing yellow helmets," one resident told French radio of the reported mercenaries.
One resident, Moftah, told al-Jazeera the city had become a war zone. Local residents had formed vigilante groups to keep watch over neighbourhoods.
The protest movement spread to Tripoli, where dozens of lawyers held a sit-in in front of the courts in protest against the regime. Gunshots were reported in the Fachlum and Tajura suburbs. In working-class areas of the Gourghi neighbourhood in western Tripoli, protesters against the regime gathered chanting slogans against Gaddafi. Residents said the Libyan security forces fired teargas and live ammunition to disperse the crowds. Al-Jazeera reported clashes between thousands of protesters and Gaddafi supporters in the city's central Green Square. Near the square, one hotel worker told Reuters: "There are disturbances ... We haven't had such disturbances before."
A concert by the American rapper Nas was halted last night by a volley of gunfire in mid-performance.
The shots, fired inside the Brixton Academy 25 minutes into the show, caused pandemonium in the auditorium and triggering a scramble for the doors.
According to eyewitnesses 30 police, 10 of them armed, arrived within half an hour, by which time most concertgoers had been evacuated. Others stayed inside, before police cleared the venue. An ambulance arrived, although later nobody was reported injured.
Nas left the stage within minutes of the incident, but there was confusion as his support act returned to the stage and attempted to entertain those who had not fled.
Hundreds of fans were left milling around outside the south London venue, uncertain if the concert would restart. They were also left asking how a gun could have been smuggled past the security cordon of a bag search and a handheld metal detector.
"It was about 25 minutes into the show and the atmosphere was peaceful for a hip-hop show," said the Guardian's pop critic, Caroline Sullivan, who attended the concert. "The gun went off and the first assumption was that it was a special effect. Then there was a second round of shots, and that was when people knew something was wrong.
"It happened at the back of the stalls. There was a surge towards the rear entrances. People were shouting, and there was a general feeling of urgency and fear. There was a bottleneck at the doors."
Nas's publicist, Shoshanna Gilbert, said afterward: "It's ironic because only today he released his latest single, Just a Moment, which is about the fact he is dead against violence in rap. This is not something he stands for, and he doesn't understand why there should be a connection."
A spokeswoman for the Metropolitan police said last night: "Police are searching the venue. The [gunman] suspect was described as a black male by witnesses. No arrests have been made. We are continuing our inquiries."
The venue has often been heavily policed for hip-hop gigs, but not on this occasion, according to those there.
Just before the shooting, Nas had been telling the crowd how much the atmosphere reminded him of his home in New York, where shooting incidents at hip-hop concerts are more frequent. Despite a public feud with the rapper Jay-Z, Nas does not have a violent reputation and his music is considered to be relatively political. One song on his latest album, Street's Disciple, features the US secretary of state, Condoleezza Rice. He complains of how she is letting down poor black families.
His last concert at the Brixton Academy, in 2003, saw trouble when 50 people attempted to charge into the venue without tickets. Last night's concert was much awaited, as Nas has toured the UK only three times in the last 10 years. Nas is on hip-hop's A-list, and his partner is the celebrity rapper Kelis.
A gunman opened fire at a Florida concert venue as singer Christina Grimmie signed autographs for fans after a show, killing the onetime star of The Voice before shooting and killing himself, officials have said.
A publicist for Grimmie, Heather Walsh, said in an email early on Saturday that ¡°we can confirm that Christina has passed and went home to be with the Lord¡±. The Orlando police department also confirmed on its official Twitter page that Grimmie had died.
Police said that the 22-year-old singer had performed with the band Before You Exit at The Plaza Live in Orlando. The concert ended about 10pm, and Grimmie was shot as she signed autographs for fans at a merchandise table.
Grimmie¡¯s brother immediately tackled the gunman, who then shot and killed himself during the struggle, police said.
The gunman was not identified, and police have not said why he attacked the singer. An investigation is continuing, but police credited the singer¡¯s brother with preventing the gunman from hurting others.
Grimmie, who was born in New Jersey, finished third during season six of the US series of The Voice, competing on the team of Maroon 5 star Adam Levine.
She began amassing a following on YouTube as a teenager, gripping online viewers with her powerful renditions of hit songs. Several of her videos on YouTube have garnered millions of views.
When reports of Grimmie¡¯s death first surfaced, #PrayforChristina was the top trending hashtag on Twitter. After her death was confirmed, #RIPChristina became the top trending hashtag as Grimmie¡¯s fans took to social media to express an outpouring of grief.
The Voice paid tribute to Grimmie on its official Twitter page: ¡°There are no words. We lost a beautiful soul with an amazing voice.¡±
Grimmie had posted a video of herself shortly before the concert was scheduled to begin, encouraging fans to come see her perform.
Levine posted a photo of himself with Grimmie on Instagram, commenting before her death was confirmed: ¡°I¡¯m sad, shocked and confused. We love you so much Grimmie. We are all praying hard that you can pull through this ... this just isn¡¯t fair.¡±
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported in 2014 that Grimmie moved to Los Angeles in 2012 after joining Selena Gomez on tour to focus on her singing career.
¡°I¡¯m done being surprised by cool things she does. She¡¯s very talented and she¡¯s worked incredibly hard; it¡¯s a dangerous combination,¡± her brother, Mark Grimmie, told the newspaper at the time.
The University of Papua New Guinea has won a court injunction banning further protests after police opened fire on students demonstrating against the country¡¯s prime minister and government on Wednesday, shooting at least eight.
The students¡¯ simmering five-week protest demanding the resignation of Peter O¡¯Neill over corruption allegations reached a brutal zenith on Wednesday, when students tried to board buses on campus to travel to Parliament House ? where parliament was sitting ? to protest and to present a petition to the PM.
Armed police blocked the students¡¯ path and then opened fire, reportedly using live rounds.
Video shows dozens of shots ringing out, as students flee from the protest. Smoke rises from the area and students can be heard screaming.
The PNG government says five students were wounded ? other sources put the number as high as 15 ? in the clash and denies anyone was killed by the officers.
Opposition MPs told parliament that four people had been killed but no deaths have been confirmed.
Grant Muddle, the chief executive of Port Moresby General Hospital, said there were no deaths at his hospital, or people brought to the hospital already dead.
¡°We have so far received a total of eight gunshot wound casualties. All eight were stabilised and admitted at the hospital.¡±
A further 16 people, including a primary school student, were treated for injuries sustained in the protest violence.One student activist described the actions of police who opened fire on a group of university students as an ambush.
¡°The police ordered them to move out of the bus, pulled them down and then they said ¡®you¡¯re not going to Parliament¡¯ and then it was like ambush,¡± the People¡¯s Power Movement leader, Noel Anjo, said. ¡°They were assaulting and firing at them.¡±
The police commissioner, Gary Baki, said it was the students¡¯ fault the protest had turned violent.
¡°They came out on to the road and prevented the police to perform their duties, which resulted in this incident that has taken place and it is unfortunate that students have been injured in the course of this incident.¡±
The unrest spread across the university campus, the capital and the country. University dorms were set alight at the University of PNG, mothers marched in the streets of PNG, their faces daubed with mud for mourning, and an angry crowd spontaneously gathered outside the hospital where the injured students were taken.
A mob armed with machetes tried to burn down a police barracks, according to the police commissioner.
In PNG¡¯s second-largest city, Lae, students at the University of Technology set alight government cars.
Extra police, including recruits from police college, have been stationed across Port Moresby to quell further outbreaks of violence. The University of PNG sought, and won, a court injunction preventing students protesting and boycotting classes.
For more than a month, students at the University of PNG have boycotted classes and protested over historical corruption allegations levelled against O¡¯Neill.
O¡¯Neill has been accused by PNG police¡¯s Taskforce Sweep of acting corruptly in allegedly authorised the payment of $30m of fraudulent legal bills to the law firm Paul Paraka.
A warrant for O¡¯Neill¡¯s arrest on corruption charges was issued in 2014 but the prime minister has taken extraordinary steps to avoid it.
O¡¯Neill sacked a number of high-level public servants and ministers, including the police commissioner and attorney general, and disbanded Taskforce Sweep. He also gained court injunctions against aspects of the warrant.The national police¡¯s anti-corruption unit was shut down earlier this year, just as it was about to question O¡¯Neill. A judge since ordered it be reopened but the police force was split when supporters of the police commissioner barricaded the unit¡¯s office to prevent its reopening.
O¡¯Neill has been defiant in response. He says the charges against him are politically motivated and that will not stand down while they are investigated. He told parliament Wednesday ¡°everyone in this country is innocent until proven guilty¡±.In a statement issued Wednesday night, he said the ¡°blood of the injured students¡± was on the hands of politicians and ¡°criminal elements¡± who had supported the protests and that students who had spent weeks protesting and calling for his resignation would now have to ¡°face the consequences of their low grades¡±.
The protestors, however, say they will continue to resist. They say their demonstrations are broader than just targeting the prime minister but are against a ruling elite they regard as deeply and systemically corrupt.
¡°We are fed up with the government, we are fed up with the police,¡± Anjo said. ¡°We¡¯re mourning, we¡¯re mourning for our country because our country is sinking,¡±
A man who was found at Bondi with a gunshot wound is believed to have been on board a luxury yacht that was sprayed with bullets in Sydney's eastern suburbs on Wednesday night.
Oscar II was approaching Rose Bay wharf late on New Year's Day when an unknown person opened fire on it, police said. After the shooting the boat turned away from the wharf and was stopped by police a short time later and towed to the Marine Area Command at Balmain.
The 32-metre luxury motor yacht is available for hire at more than $2,000 an hour.
Less than two hours later a 31-year-old man was discovered at Lamrock Avenue, opposite Bondi Beach, with a gunshot wound to his shoulder.
A witness in Bondi said he spoke to the injured man before police arrived.
"We just walked past and this guy just said, 'man, I've been shot in the back' and then these coppers just showed up and they've taken over the scene¡±, the man said.
Emergency services took him to St Vincent's hospital. He has since discharged himself, police say. A crime scene has also been established at Bondi Beach.
Police say they believe the man was aboard Oscar II at Rose Bay and was injured in the shooting.
Two men are in hospital after being shot in east London.
Police are investigating after the victims were found with gunshot wounds in Forest Gate at about 3.10pm on Monday.
Both men were rushed to an east London hospital. One has life-threatening injuries, while the other has possible life-changing injuries, a Metropolitan police spokesman said.
Ch Supt Ade Adelekan, head of policing in the London borough of Newham, said: ¡°Sadly, today two young men have been shot on our streets, one of whom remains critically ill in hospital. We are only too well aware that this incident comes after a number of shootings and firearms discharges that are blighting our communities and seriously injuring our young men.¡±
He added that there would be extra officers on duty in the borough overnight due to fears there could be a revenge attack, and that he had authorised them to use stop and search tactics.
¡°Proactive work will continue with our borough teams and specialist units such as Trident Area and Crime Command to investigate and catch the people responsible for these offences,¡± he said.
¡°Violence has no place on our streets and we have already made four arrests in connection with recent firearms offences.
¡°I want the community of Newham to help us tackle this ? if you have any information about people carrying or supplying firearms please let us know and we will take action.¡±
There has been a surge in gun crime in the capital in the past year.
Met police figures published in April revealed a 42% rise in gun offences ? up to 2,544 compared with 1,793 between April 2015 and 2016.
Scotland Yard¡¯s anti-gang crime unit has issued CCTV footage of an attack with a sawn-off shotgun in daylight on a residential street in Brixton, south London.
The video shows three hooded men involved in the assault which left a man and a boy with gunshot wounds on an early evening in May.
The footage shows one of the suspects getting a sawn-off shotgun from under his coat and handing it over to another of the group. The suspect with the gun is then seen shooting at a man across the street, who appears to stumble after shots are fired and then runs to safety.
Later footage from a different camera shows one of the suspects riding off on a mountain bike while pointing the gun at passersby.
A 21-year-old man made a full recovery after shots punctured his lung and windpipe. A 16-year-old, who was on his way to the library when he inadvertently ran into the path of the gunman, suffered a minor wound to his arm.
DC Jo Ross, from Trident and area crime command, leading the investigation, appealed for the public¡¯s help in identifying the attackers.
He said: ¡°The 21-year-old victim was fortunate to recover from what were potentially life-threatening injuries at the time of the incident. Other passersby were threatened by having a shotgun pointed at them ? these are dangerous people.
¡°We are keen for the public to give us any information in relation to this appeal. It happened in broad daylight and in an area full of schoolchildren.¡±
Police also released three still images of the three suspects. One is described as a medium-built black man in his 20s wearing a dark blue hooded top, with a dark coloured bag over his shoulder and wearing black and white gloves. The other two are described as slim-built black men in their 20s.
One was wearing a top with Franklin and Marshall logo across the front and fur-lined hat with ear flaps. The other was wearing a baseball cap with a white mark on the peak and black gloves.
A man shot dead inside a nightclub in London's West End on Boxing Day has been named by police as Hassan Isman Omer.
The 31-year-old, from Poplar in east London, died in hospital after sustaining multiple gunshot wounds at around 3am on Thursday during a private function in the Avalon club on Shaftesbury Avenue.
Next of kin have been informed and a postmortem examination is expected to take place on Saturday afternoon at Westminster mortuary.
Two men ? a 31-year-old and a 34-year-old ? arrested on suspicion of murder have been bailed to a date in mid-February, Scotland Yard said.
The Avalon Soho describes itself as a cocktail lounge with live DJs every night.
A Metropolitan police spokesman said: "Detectives are continuing to appeal to anyone who was inside the Avalon nightclub at the event, or who witnessed events inside the club, to contact them."
Anyone with information is asked to contact the incident room on 020-8785 8244 or anonymously call Crimestoppers on 0800-555111.
The body of a man found dead in a park of an apparent suicide has been positively identified as that of a murder suspect who was the last person seen with a missing eight-year-old girl, police said Tuesday.
The man found dead Monday with an apparent gunshot wound was identified as Kahlil Tatum, 51, of Washington, police said. Tatum was a janitor at the city homeless shelter where Relisha Rudd had been living with her family. The search for Relisha was continuing.
Tatum's death appears to be a suicide and the discovery of his body was a shock for police because they were focused on finding Relisha, Washington police chief Cathy Lanier said Monday.
Police began searching for Relisha in the 700-acre Kenilworth Aquatic Gardens last week in an operation aimed at recovering a body, although Lanier said she had not given up hope that Relisha was alive. Hundreds of people, including divers, have participated in the search.
Relisha was last seen March 1 in the company of Tatum, a janitor at the homeless shelter where she lived with her mother and brothers. Relisha's mother had allowed her to spend time with Tatum, and her family did not report her missing. Repeated absences from school led authorities to start looking for her March 19.
The following day, the body of Tatum's wife was found in a motel in nearby Oxon Hill, Maryland, dead of a gunshot wound to the head. Kahlil Tatum has been charged in a warrant with murder.
On March 2, police said, Tatum purchased 42-gallon trash bags, and he was seen that day in the area of the park, in the northeastern sector of the capital.
Two partygoers have been shot by police during a fancy-dress swingers ball at a Melbourne nightclub after what might have been a fake gun was pulled on officers.
A man and a woman sustained gunshot wounds at Inflation nightclub on King Street shortly after 3am on Saturday.
The club was hosting a Saints and Sinners Ball, an erotic fancy-dress party described on its website as a ¡°no holds barred extravaganza of adult fun¡±.
Police arrived at the club after a report of a man being armed with a gun at the venue.
Fairfax Media reports the 35-year-old man was dressed as Batman character the Joker and was with a woman dressed as Harley Quinn.
The man allegedly drew a handgun from his pants and pointed it at approaching officers and would not drop it when asked.
¡°As a response police then fired a number of shots and a male and female were injured,¡± Superintendent Lisa Hardeman told reporters on Saturday morning, but wouldn¡¯t comment on reports the man was also shot with a stun gun.
Security staff at the club told police they thought the gun might have been a fake.
Police could not yet confirm whether the firearm was real or an imitation but they said it was being investigated.
¡°When a firearm is pointed at you in these circumstances, police are not sure at that stage whether it is real or an imitation,¡± Hardeman said.
¡°That will be part of the investigation.¡±
The man was shot in the torso and taken to Royal Melbourne hospital under police guard in a critical condition.
The woman was shot in the leg and taken to the Alfred hospital in a stable condition.
The ¡°rockers, punks and goths¡± themed ball was aimed at ¡°broadminded adults¡± and tickets were sold at $55 each.
Multiple people were shot inside their cars near a Houston shopping center on Monday morning, by a gunman whose own vehicle contained ¡°numerous weapons¡± and was being examined by a bomb squad, police said.
Six people were taken to local hospitals and three who were struck by debris and glass were treated on the scene and released, said Martha Montalvo, interim chief at the Houston police department.
One of the six people taken to hospital was in critical condition, authorities said, and another was in serious condition.
Montalvo said police received a call reporting gunfire at 6.29am. A gunman shot at the officers who arrived on the scene and police returned fire. The suspect was pronounced dead soon after, Montalvo said.
The only information immediately released about the gunman¡¯s identity was that: ¡°He is a lawyer and there were issues concerning his law firm.¡±
Houston¡¯s mayor, Sylvester Turner, told local station KTRK-TV that the lawyer was ¡°disgruntled¡± and was ¡°either fired or had a bad relationship with this law firm¡±.
Law enforcement officials were investigating what was believed to be the suspect¡¯s vehicle, a Porsche. ¡°It has numerous weapons and we are bringing in the bomb squad to secure it¡¯s safe,¡± Montalvo said.The shooting happened in a parking lot in Houston¡¯s Upper Kirby commercial district, a wealthy neighborhood that has red phone booths installed on street corners because it shares the same initials as the UK.
Jennifer Molleda and her husband live in the same condo complex as the shooter. Though she heard gunshots about 6.12am and called 911, her husband left for work. The 45-year-old called him not long after, she told the Associated Press, and he told her: ¡°I¡¯m hit, I¡¯m hit.¡±
After the shooting stopped at 7.15am, Molleda found her husband, 49-year-old Alan Wakim, several blocks away in the parking lot of a nearby strip mall. Two shots had gone through the windshield of his Mustang, and he told her he saw a red laser beam before the shots were fired. He was taken to a hospital to be treated.
¡°He got out of his car, we hugged, we cried,¡± Molleda said, adding that she believed the man was ¡°aiming to kill¡±.
Molleda added that a few weeks ago, the suspect brandished an assault-style weapon at roofers in the condo complex. She did not know him very well, she said, but described him as quiet.
Lee Williams left his home in the neighborhood upon hearing gunshots and began directing traffic away from the condo complex, noting that people usually cut through the area to avoid some busier intersections.
One car ignored him, he said, and was immediately shot at. Williams couldn¡¯t see the gunman because it was dark, but believed he saw the muzzle flashes.
¡°Whatever cars were going by, he was shooting at them,¡± the 55-year-old said, noting he heard at least 50 gunshots over 40 or so minutes. As Williams was being interviewed, neighbors came by and patted him on the back, thanking him for keeping people safe.
The incident occurred just two days after a gunman opened fire in a Washington state mall, killing five people. A suspect in that incident was taken into custody on Sunday. A little over a week earlier, an attacker at a mall in St Cloud, Minnesota, stabbed 10 people before being shot dead by an off-duty police officer.
An expert on gunshot wounds hired by the defense testified on Tuesday that a neighborhood watch volunteer's account of how he fatally shot an unarmed black teen is consistent with the forensic evidence.
Dr Vincent Di Maio said the trajectory of the bullet and gun powder on Trayvon Martin's body support George Zimmerman's version that Martin was on top of him when Zimmerman fired his gun into Martin's chest. The gun's muzzle was against Martin's clothing and it was anywhere from two to four inches from Martin's skin, he said.
"This is consistent with Mr Zimmerman's account that Mr Martin was over him, leaning forward at the time he was shot," said Di Maio, the former chief medical examiner in San Antonio.
The pathologist also said it was likely Martin was conscious for 10 to 15 seconds after the shooting, as a reserve supply of oxygen ran out of his body, and during that time it was possible for him to have moved his arms. Zimmerman's account that he had placed Martin's arms out to his sides after the shooting contradicts a photo taken after the shooting that shows Martin's arms under his body. Defense attorneys contend Martin moved his arms.
Di Maio testified that lacerations to the back of Zimmerman's head were consistent with his head striking a concrete sidewalk. Later, when looking at photos of Zimmerman's injuries taken on the night of the shooting, Di Maio identified six separate impacts to Zimmerman's face and head. He said a nose injury could have come from being punched.
Di Maio also explained that if clothes taken into evidence are wet and packaged in plastic bags, and not paper bags, it can ruin the samples since "bacteria multiplies and you get mold and it stinks to high heaven". Defense attorneys believe DNA evidence found on Martin's hooded sweatshirt and undershirt was degraded since the clothing wasn't packaged properly.
Earlier in the morning, Judge Debra Nelson considered a request from prosecutors to bar the defense from showing animation depicting the fight between Martin and Zimmerman. Nelson held an evidence hearing with jurors out of the courtroom, but ultimately postponed her decision and more arguments on the matter until later in the afternoon. Prosecutors object to the animation, saying it isn't an accurate depiction.
Defense attorneys called the man who created the animation to testify. To recreate the fight, Daniel Schumaker went to the crime scene and had employees in motion-capture suits re-enact what happened based on coroner photographs, police reports, the coroner's report, witness depositions and photos taken by responding police officers, he said.
The fight took place on a dark, rainy night in February 2012 and there were no eyewitnesses who saw the entire fight. Several witnesses saw and heard parts of the struggle that left Martin dead with a bullet in his heart.
Testimony in previous days has focused on a police call that captures screams from the struggle between Martin and Zimmerman. Convincing the jury of who was screaming for help on the tape has become the primary goal of prosecutors and defense attorneys, because it would help jurors evaluate Zimmerman's self-defense claim. Relatives of Martin and Zimmerman have offered conflicting opinions about who is heard screaming.
Zimmerman's mother and uncle testified last Friday it was Zimmerman screaming; Martin's mother and brother also took the witness stand last Friday to say the voice belongs to Martin. Martin's father testified Monday that he initially couldn't tell if the screams came from his son, but later decided they did. Zimmerman himself once said during a police interview that the screams didn't sound like him, though he and his family later said the screams were his.
Zimmerman has pleaded not guilty to second-degree murder and says he shot Martin in self-defense during a scuffle in the townhome complex where he lived. Martin was there visiting his father and his father's fiancee.
At least two people have been injured after a gun was accidentally fired during a speech by President Francois Hollande, French media have reported.
Hollande was speaking in the town of Villognon in central France to mark the opening of a high-speed railway line between Paris and Bordeaux when a police marksman accidentally opened fire, the Sud-Ouest newspaper reported.
The paper quoted local officials as saying the member of the elite gendarmerie protection squad charged with protecting the president was positioned on a rooftop about 100 metres from the marquee where the ceremony was taking place.
The safety catch on the officer¡¯s rifle was reportedly off and the shot was fired when he tripped while adjusting his position. The bullet pierced the marquee roof, hitting a waiter in the leg and a railway employee in the foot, according to Pierre N¡¯Gahane, state prefect of the Charente region.There were unconfirmed local media reports that the sniper had shot himself in the foot and could be seen hopping up and down.
Hollande, who is not standing for a second term in the presidential elections next month, had just started speaking to the guests at a cocktail party to celebrate the opening of the line when the shot went off, the paper reported.
A loud noise like a gunshot is heard on video footage of the president¡¯s speech. ¡°I hope there is nothing serious,¡± Hollande said, then looked to his left and said, ¡°I don¡¯t think so¡±. He then continued his speech.
An inquiry had been opened into the incident, officials said. The injuries were not said to be serious and Hollande was among the guests who rushed to their aid, according to Le Parisien.
An altercation between two men appears to have triggered the outbreak of mass panic in London on one of the busiest shopping days of the year, leading to people fleeing in fear, armed police being deployed and a section of the West End being evacuated.
British Transport Police issued a CCTV appeal for information about two men believed to be involved in a fight in Oxford Circus tube station on Friday afternoon as part of their inquiries into the cause of the panic.
Nine people were injured as hundreds ran to escape what they believed to be an attack on Friday evening, only to find it was a false alarm. The reaction was a sign of just how jittery many have become at the end of a year in which the capital and Manchester have been targeted by five terrorist attacks.
Sophia Smith, a witness to the fight, told the Guardian an altercation on a Victoria line platform panicked travellers and caused people to start running.
¡°Young boys with a few girls were attacking each other and everyone screamed and began to run,¡± she said. ¡°I escaped through the exit along with hundreds of other people and some women were on the floor and shoes were falling off and shopping bags. It was absolutely terrifying.¡±
The incident began just after 4.30pm and centred on the tube station, where a number of passengers began to flee believing that they had heard gunshots.
As they fled, so did other passengers inside the station. As the crowds spilled out on to Oxford Street, hundreds of Christmas shoppers also started to run.
Within minutes, Oxford Street and Bond Street underground stations were both closed and Scotland Yard was issuing alerts on Twitter, warning people in the area to get inside the nearest building and stay there.
¡°If you are in a building stay in a building, if you are on the street in Oxford Street leave the area,¡± the Met police said.
The panic appears to have been spread not only by the sight of fleeing crowds and word of mouth, but by incorrect reports on social media.
Inside nearby pubs and restaurants, people crowded into the cellars, while shop staff moved customers away from the doors and windows.
¡°There was a mass stampede of people running and trying to get away as quickly as they could,¡± said the BBC producer Helen Bushby, who was in the area. ¡°They were crying, they were screaming, they were dropping their shopping bags. It was a very panicked scene. A couple of people said they thought it was a gunshot or a fire.¡±
Another witness said he saw an elderly woman and a man carrying a child knocked over in the rush. ¡°There were people running in all directions,¡± he said.
At Westminster University, a few hundred metres from Oxford Circus, students and staff were locked in. ¡°I was in class and there was a helicopter, lots of ambulances and police cars,¡± said Andrea Acedo, 21. ¡°Then I heard that someone was shooting people but we didn¡¯t know where, so they had to lock down the university so no one could come in.¡±
Armed police were on the scene within minutes and a police helicopter hovered overhead. But after searching the area for almost an hour, police announced that no suspects had been found and there was no evidence of any shots having been fired.
The London ambulance service said several people sustained injuries in the rush to escape from the area. Eight people were taken to London hospitals for treatment for minor injuries, and one person was taken to a major trauma centre after sustaining leg injuries.
After the stations were reopened and police cordons lifted, the Met and the British Transport Police said their response had been stood down.
¡°Given the nature of the information received, we responded as if the incident was terrorism, including the deployment of armed officers,¡± the Met said.
The transport police said there had been ¡°a significant level of panic¡± in the area.
Police released a CCTV image of the two men believed to be involved in the altercation and said officers ¡°would now like to speak to these two people in the CCTV images, who they believe may have information about the incident and the circumstances around the incident. They would also like to speak to anyone who was at the station or in the area at the time and saw or heard anything that would have caused mass evacuation¡±.
Although some stores remained closed after the panic, most of the Oxford Circus area returned to normal.
At Ponti¡¯s Italian Kitchen, a few metres from the tube station, customers sheltering in the basement erupted in applause when a waitress announced that there had been no terrorist incident.
People returned to their evening commute and the Evening Standard distributors returned to their newsstands.
Four terrorist attacks in London this year have left 18 dead and 137 injured. A further 22 people were killed by a suicide bomber in Manchester.
The UK terrorism threat level is set at ¡°severe¡±, meaning an attack is assessed to be highly likely.
Anyone with any information should contact British Transport Police on 0800 40 50 40 or text 61016 citing reference 405 of 24/11.
A police marksman accidentally opens fire during a speech by French president Francois Hollande on Tuesday, reportedly injuring two people. In footage filmed by French television station france 3, Hollande can be seen pausing momentarily at the sound of the gunshot and staring off to the right hand side of the stage, before continuing his speech
In one of Michael Bell¡¯s earliest encounters with Tyre King, the sports coach had to sneak the boy into a Columbus, Ohio, recreation center to play basketball. The age limit for the play center was 12, and Tyre was 13.
¡°But, me, I was like, ¡®Hey, I want to get these kids in here,¡¯¡± said Bell, 43. ¡°This is a safe haven. So, I¡¯d sneak him in sometimes.¡±
Tyre, barely 5ft tall, just shy of 100lbs at 13 years old, was a bubbly kid who typically wore a wide smile, ¡°just trying to figure himself out¡±, Bell said on Monday.
Last Wednesday, Tyre was killed by a Columbus police officer who was responding to a report of armed robbery. Police said King used a BB gun that resembled a genuine firearm to rob a Columbus resident of $10. When officers arrived, Tyre was spotted with two males who soon fled on foot. Moments later, police said, an officer fired ¡°multiple¡± times after Tyre reached for a BB gun in his waistband. He was pronounced dead at a hospital soon after.
His death has gripped the Rust Belt city of 850,000, where residents protesting the shooting say uneven economic development has not benefited poorer neighborhoods like the one where Tyre lived.
The environment Tyre was raised in mirrors ¡°so many young men¡± in Columbus, said Mark Stansberry, Tyre¡¯s former hockey coach. ¡°A lot of dysfunctionality,¡± he said, ¡°but he was resilient.¡±
¡°He was ¡¦ always coming in with that smile,¡± Stansberry said. ¡°His smile was as big as the helmet.¡±
Last Wednesday, around 7.45pm, Columbus police said officers were dispatched to respond to reports of an armed robbery of a man for $10. The victim said a suspect was carrying a Ruger pistol.
¡°I¡¯m not going to mess with it over $10,¡± the victim told the dispatcher. When police arrived, three males ? including Tyre ? matching the description of the suspects were spotted. Officers approached Tyre in an alley. Shortly after, police say Tyre reached for a BB gun from his waistband. It was then Mason, a nine-year veteran of the Columbus police division, shot King ¡°multiple¡± times. Tyre was transferred to a local hospital and pronounced dead at 8.22pm.
But reports and an independent autopsy released on Monday offered more clues of what transpired when police arrived. A friend with the teen at the time of the shooting, Demetrius Braxton, told the Columbus Dispatch that police ordered them to get down, ¡°but my friend got up and ran ¡¦ [and] when he ran, the cops shot him.¡±
The county coroner said on Monday that results of its autopsy on Tyre won¡¯t be released for at least six weeks, pending the completion of toxicology tests. Columbus mayor Andrew Ginther promised a thorough investigation into the shooting, and has said the results will be turned over to a grand jury.
Conflicting reports from a witness and friend of Tyre, along with an independent medical examiner¡¯s autopsy released by the child¡¯s family on Monday, have stoked concerns from residents and activists about law enforcement in the city.
¡°The Columbus police department, the City of Columbus and most importantly Tyre King and his family deserve the benefit of an investigation from a law enforcement agency that has no direct impact from the outcome of that investigation,¡± the family said in a statement.
The area where Tyre was killed is a ¡°historic black community¡± that has witnessed a rise in investment over the last several years, said Tammy Fournier-Alsaada, an organizer with the People¡¯s Justice Project and lifelong resident of Columbus.
¡°You see historic buildings; the beauty and architecture in any one of these houses around here will blow your mind,¡± Fournier-Alsaada, 55, said during a drive around the neighborhood on Sunday. Fixtures by the local artist Ahmina Robinson, who passed away last year, are situated around the area, Fournier-Alsaada said, ¡°to remind people of the history of what this looked like when black folks¡± lived there.
But as the city has reinvested in the area, police have deployed what¡¯s known as the city¡¯s Summer Safety Initiative to patrol the streets, she said, where officers ¡°terrorize, arrest, harass¡± people.
¡°There are many cases [stemming from the initiative] where police have been investigated and some have been kicked off the force for their tactics,¡± Fournier-Alsaada said. Indeed, in June, police officers in the initiative shot and killed 23-year-old Henry Green, near the high school attended by Tyre.
With both shootings occurring in a span of a few months, activists said they were stunned to hear Mayor Ginther proclaim Columbus is one of the safest major cities in the US.
¡°A lot of activists are asking: ¡®Well, safe for whom?¡¯¡± said Amber Evans, 26, also an organizer with the People¡¯s Justice Project. ¡°Because it doesn¡¯t feel safe for kids with toy guns, for little black boys.¡±
Tyre¡¯s death was the 13th police shooting in Columbus this year, the city¡¯s police chief said last week, and that includes five fatalities. The city ranks 27th in major cities for violent crime, according to FBI data, and 21st for homicides. Still, Evans said, the semblance of safety and access to opportunity isn¡¯t shared across the city¡¯s residents.
¡°It¡¯s this idea that Columbus is this place where we have low crime and we have affordable housing and job opportunities, but all of those things are only afforded to the few, and that few does include people of color,¡± she said.
At the rally on Monday, Evans and Fournier-Alsaada¡¯s group released a list of demands to the city¡¯s mayor, including a call to let residents shape the Summer Safety Initiative, new trauma service programs in areas affected by violence, and new community-policing initiatives.
Standing nearby, Larry Robertson, a local musician, reflected on how his former hometown of Cleveland was rankled by the death of Tamir Rice, who was killed by police while carrying a pellet gun in a city park at 12 years old.
¡°Being from Cleveland with Tamir, that really upset me,¡± he said, adding: ¡°Then with it happening again here within a couple years. I wasn¡¯t even over that, per se.¡±
The fact Tyre died at 13 years old, Robertson said, shook him.
¡°If I was to die today, I¡¯ve had a chance to live life,¡± he said. ¡°I¡¯ve made memories, I¡¯ve been in love, I¡¯ve known what it feels like to have small successes. Traveled a little bit. Thirteen, I didn¡¯t know shit. I didn¡¯t experience anything, I didn¡¯t get out of my neighborhood which was in the inner city. I hadn¡¯t had a chance to make my mistakes and learn from them.¡±
Brian Thompson, 37, traveled to the rally from his hometown of Akron, Ohio. A father of twin boys who are 10, the death of Tyre has been unnerving and ¡°scary¡±, Thompson said. Last week, he was in a sporting goods store when one of his children asked if he could buy a paintball gun. The answer was simple.
¡°I told him no, you can¡¯t have any guns,¡± he said. ¡°I can¡¯t afford for you to have a gun. Our kids can¡¯t play with toy guns.¡±
1X IPS CORPSE/LT [xxxxx] WAS FOUND WITH MULTIPLE GSW TO THE BODY. THE CORPSE WAS TAKEN TO THE LOCAL MORGUE. NFI.
The attack at a country music festival in Las Vegas that left at least 58 people dead is the deadliest mass shooting in modern US history ? but there were six other mass shootings in America this past week alone.
No other developed nation comes close to the rate of gun violence in America. Americans own an estimated 265m guns, more than one gun for every adult.
Data compiled by the Gun Violence Archive reveals a shocking human toll: there is a mass shooting ? defined as four or more people shot in one incident, not including the shooter ? every nine out of 10 days on average.
At least 59 people have died and hundreds injured after the Route 91 Harvest country music festival near the Mandalay Bay casino came under gunfire. Video footage from witnesses shows the moment the shooting started, and the ensuing panic. The police have responded to the attack and locked down the area? Warning: some viewers may find this footage distressing
The police chief in the Alabama university city of Auburn said authorities responded during the night to a report of multiple gunshot victims at an apartment complex, but he released no immediate information as Sunday saw the building cordoned in yellow tape.
Auburn police chief Tommy Dawson told the Opelika-Auburn News that police answered the report of multiple shooting victims on Saturday night, but he had no immediate comment on what happened or whether anyone was in custody.
News photographs showed several emergency vehicles had converged overnight around the University Heights apartment complex where reports indicated a number of students who attend Auburn University typically reside.
At dawn on Sunday, an Associated Press reporter at the scene said several uniformed law enforcement officers were standing about a disaster relief trailer parked at the building's entrance, and all was quiet as some bystanders milled about.
An Auburn police dispatcher said early on Sunday that she had no immediate information to release. Police did not immediately return repeated telephone messages seeking comment. A local coroner's office also said it had no information on the situation to immediately give out.
The disaster relief trailer was parked near the entrance to the University Heights apartment complex and large amounts of yellow tape roped off areas around a front entrance area. An Auburn police truck had towed a large array of spotlights to the area outside the building and they were brilliantly lighting up the entrance to the complex early on a dark, overcast morning.
Auburn University campus police said they had no information and referred calls to city police.
Vasha Hunt, a photographer with the Opelika-Auburn News, was at the apartment complex hours earlier and told AP by telephone before dawn that authorities had set up a white tent there where there was a lot of activity. He said police kept a number of bystanders back for hours away from the scene.
Hunt said at least some of those who initially gathered outside appeared to be residents waiting for permission to enter their apartments and about a dozen police cars, ambulances and other emergency vehicles were parked nearby. Some other reports said students looking on in a somber mood at the scene and that some complex residents who showed identification were later let back into their apartments.
Connecticut state police have obtained a video that apparently shows a 15-year-old after he was shot by a police officer.
Police confirmed Sunday they had seen the video posted online Friday by Giovanni Rivera, who says he is the cousin of Jayson Negron.
Police said the Bridgeport officer James Boulay shot Negron after he hit the officer with a stolen car Tuesday. Police pronounced Negron dead at the scene.
The shaky, amateur video shows Negron lying on the ground. The camera turns away from him and when it cuts back four seconds later, the position of Negron¡¯s head has changed. An officer is standing near him.
Autopsy results show Negron died from gunshot wounds to the chest.
Police said Negron¡¯s handcuffed body was lying in the street for several hours after the shooting for ¡°evidence-gathering reasons¡±.
Surveillance footage from an Ohio Walmart store, where police killed a young black man who was holding an unloaded air rifle and talking on his cellphone, shows he was was shot from the side as he moved to run away from advancing officers.
Police had repeatedly been told via a customer on the line to a 911 dispatcher that John Crawford III was pointing the gun at shoppers and may have loaded it with bullets. But the footage, released by prosecutors on Wednesday, shows Crawford walking past several customers in the minutes before he died without pointing the gun at them.
In the final moments of the footage from 5 August (warning, graphic images), Crawford is seen standing at the end of an aisle, pointing the gun downwards at his side, occasionally swinging it and holding it towards a store shelf containing pet products. Oblivious to the unfolding police response, Crawford, 22, talks casually on the phone with the mother of his two young sons.
A grand jury in Greene County declined on Wednesday to indict Sean Williams, the police officer who shot Crawford, on charges of murder, reckless homicide or negligent homicide. After hearing from 18 witnesses and considering video and audio evidence, the jurors concluded on their third day in session that Williams acted reasonably in shooting Crawford dead at the store in Beavercreek, a suburb of Dayton.
An attorney for Crawford¡¯s family described their decision as ¡°absolutely incomprehensible¡±. The US department of justice quickly announced that it would review the case with the Federal Bureau of Investigation to look into the possibility of federal criminal charges.
Mark Piepmeier, the special prosecutor for the case, told a press conference that Crawford was the victim of ¡°a perfect storm of circumstances¡± and ¡°didn¡¯t do anything wrong¡±. However, enough of the grand jurors ¡°decided that the police officers, and the police officer in particular that fired the shots, was justified in doing what he did¡±.
The officers believed that they were dealing with a so-called ¡°active shooter situation¡±, Piepmeier said, and had just two weeks earlier been trained to ¡°engage the active threat upon arrival¡±. He added: ¡°Were the police facing such a situation here? No. Did they know that? No. They¡¯re told ¡®we¡¯ve got a guy in here with a rifle, he¡¯s holding the rifle, and he¡¯s pointing it at people¡¯.¡±
The 911 caller, Ronald Ritchie, later clarified to the Guardian in an interview that ¡°at no point did he shoulder the rifle and point it at somebody¡±, stressing instead that Crawford had been ¡°waving it around¡± and that the muzzle had moved in the direction of other shoppers. Ritchie told the dispatcher that Crawford pointed the rifle at two children, which the footage disproves.
The footage, which was viewed by the grand jury, showed that Crawford did not move from the spot in a corner of the store on which he was already standing by the time Ritchie called 911 to report that a six-feet-tall black man was walking around with a gun.
¡°He¡¯s, like, pointing it at people,¡± Ritchie, 100ft away, told the 911 dispatcher, shortly after 8.22pm. The dispatcher relayed this to officers on the scene. Piepmeier disclosed on Wednesday that one officer actually called back to check and confirm this. ¡°Yes, that¡¯s what the caller says, he¡¯s pointing it at people,¡± the dispatcher replied, according to Piepmeier.
Crawford, who was speaking on the phone to the mother of his two young sons, had picked up the unpackaged air rifle from a shelf three minutes earlier, and continued wandering the aisles. Piepmeier said the item was ¡°designed to look like the Real McCoy¡±. The footage showed that Crawford quickly passed four other shoppers. He did not appear to point the rifle at any of them. The two people whose bodies could be seen in full did not visibly react to Crawford or the rifle as he passed them.
Crawford then moved in and out of range of the store¡¯s several surveillance cameras for the next two minutes. He could not be seen pointing the BB rifle at any other customers during the footage that was recorded.
However, Piepmeier said on Wednesday that Crawford had been noticed by staff, and that a clerk called a manager to report a man walking with a rifle. ¡°I don¡¯t know if it¡¯s real or not, but I¡¯m afraid it might cause a panic,¡± the clerk said, according to the special prosecutor. Piepmeier added that Walmart staff were ¡°in the process¡± of approaching Crawford to ask him to ¡°put it away¡± when the police arrived in response to Ritchie¡¯s 911 call.
Soon after 8.21pm, Crawford entered the pet products aisle with the rifle hoisted on his left shoulder. His father, John Crawford Jr, previously speculated in an interview with the Guardian that ¡°the rifle maybe got heavy to him¡±.
After walking to the end of the aisle and arriving near the corner of the store floor, Crawford continued his telephone conversation for more than five minutes. As he spoke, he repeatedly swung the BB gun at his side, put it back on to his shoulder, and held it horizontally, apparently directed towards the shelf packed with products. ¡°Like most people on a cellphone, after a while you become distracted,¡± said Piepmeier.
Shortly before 8.25pm, Ritchie, still on the line to the dispatcher, told her: ¡°He looked like he was trying to load it.¡± This, too, was relayed to the officers as they arrived at the store. About 55 seconds later, Angela Williams entered the pets aisle with two of her young children. Crawford stood totally still at the other end of the aisle with the rifle at his side, pointed at the floor. Yet Ritchie told the dispatcher: ¡°He just pointed it at, like, two children.¡± Forty seconds later, the dispatcher asked: ¡°You said he pointed it at a couple of kids?¡± Ritchie replied: ¡°Right.¡±
Just 35 seconds later, Sean Williams and a colleague entered the aisle between Ritchie and Crawford. They stepped out to the left from the side of a product display at a right-angle to the aisle. One officer can be heard shouting ¡°down¡± in the background of Ritchie¡¯s 911 call. Crawford, still side-on to the officers, instantly bent his knees as if to prepare to run in the other direction. Then he was shot twice in quick succession by Williams. The footage suggests that all this took place in the single second after the officers entered the aisle.
¡°He¡¯s still on the phone when these officers confront him, he¡¯s probably not paying attention to what he¡¯s doing, and this happens,¡± said Piepmeier. In contrast, Ritchie told reporters afterwards that Crawford clearly noticed the officers and chose to ignore their commands.
One shot entered the back of Crawford¡¯s left elbow, the other into his side near his liver. He dropped his BB rifle, ran forwards momentarily before apparently encountering another officer advancing from that direction. He turned around and moved briefly back in the direction of the officer who shot him, before collapsing on the ground and being restrained. ¡°Shots fired¡±, an officer said over his radio. Officer Williams moved to restrain Crawford on the ground.
As customers screamed and scrambled for the exits, Angela Williams, who had a heart condition, went into cardiac arrest and later died.
¡°All I can say about this case is that it¡¯s a tragedy,¡± said Piepmeier on Wednesday. ¡°It¡¯s a tragedy for the Crawford family, it¡¯s a tragedy for the family of Angela Williams, who died because of all the stress and commotion from this, and it¡¯s also a tragedy for the police officers who have to live the rest of their lives knowing that even though they had a justified use of force, they took the life of someone that didn¡¯t need to die.¡±
Two New York City police officers were shot and wounded by a gunman they encountered in the stairwell of a public housing project they were patrolling and the gunman later killed himself, authorities said.
Authorities on Friday confirmed the identities of the two officers as Patrick Espeut, 29, and Diara Cruz, 24.
The officers were listed in stable condition. Espeut was hit in the cheek. Cruz was shot in the abdomen.
Police say the officers encountered two people in a stairwell in the Bronx on Thursday night when one of them pulled a gun and opened fire. Both officers were struck. Police say the shooter fled into an apartment where officers found him dead of an apparently self-inflicted gunshot wound. Officials confirmed he had been identified as 23-year-old Malik Chavis.
A second person who encountered the officers in the stairwell was taken into custody.
Officers responding to the scene found the gunman in the apartment, dead of an apparently self-inflicted gunshot wound. A handgun and a shotgun were found inside the apartment, police said.
Three people in the apartment were being questioned, said New York police department first deputy commissioner Ben Tucker.
The shooting happened about five miles from where Mayor Bill de Blasio was delivering his state of the city address, much of which was dedicated to praising the work of police officers.
De Blasio was told about the shooting as he finished his speech and left the stage. He met the family of one of the officers at the hospital where they were being treated.
¡°Our brave officers were doing their jobs tonight in our public housing on patrol keeping residents safe,¡± De Blasio said. ¡°Both officers are alert and communicating, and we are praying for the best here.¡±
The officers, who are assigned to the Housing Bureau, have been on the force for about two years. The NYPD would not provide the names of the officers or the person who was in custody.
The officers were shot while they were conducting a vertical patrol, in which officers start in the lobby of a public housing project and walk the stairwells up to the roof and back down, Tucker said.
The head of the police officers¡¯ union, Patrick Lynch, said the shooting showed the dangerous nature of the job.
¡°We need your support to teach our young folks that pulling a gun on a police officer works for no one,¡± he said. ¡°This goes to show the dangers police officers face each and every day.¡±
He said the shooting showed the difficulty of vertical patrols.
A police officer is on trial for manslaughter in Brooklyn after shooting an unarmed man during a similar patrol in November 2014.
Rookie officer Peter Liang had his gun drawn in a pitch-black stairwell at the Louis Pink Houses in Brooklyn when he accidentally fired a shot. Akai Gurley was on a lower floor walking to the lobby and was struck and killed. Prosecutors say Liang was reckless and should not have had his finger on the gun¡¯s trigger.
Liang has pleaded not guilty, and his defense has suggested he had his gun drawn because of the dangerous nature of the assignment.
In January, a police officer responding to a large street fight in the Bronx was shot in the ankle. And in October, a police officer responding to a report of shots fired and a bicycle stolen at gunpoint in Manhattan¡¯s East Harlem neighborhood was killed.
Long after a gunman opened fire from the top story of the Mandalay Bay hotel on Sunday night, in an attack which killed 50 people and saw 406 taken to hospital, people in dusty, blood-stained T-shirts and jeans were still jogging away from the scene.
Flashing red and blue lights from countless ambulances and police cars nearly outshone the casino towers on the Strip. At the Rebel gas station behind the MGM Grand, survivors stood teary-eyed and shocked. Some made calls to their families. They wondered where they would go. Many had room in hotels that were now under lockdown, blockaded by law enforcement.
¡°The news said it all,¡± said Jackie Hoffing, her eyes glassy, still in a clear state of trauma. ¡°We were there enjoying our time, and it was very obvious it was gunfire coming down into the crowd.
¡°It was hysteria. There were people trampled. We jumped walls, climbed cars, ran for our lives. I¡¯ve never run that hard or been that scared in my whole life.¡±
The two gold towers of the Mandalay Bay overlook the site where a country music concert was being staged. Jason Aldean was beginning his set when, from a room on the 32nd floor, the shooter opened fire.
¡°It sounded like something was wrong with the speakers,¡± said William Walker of Ontario, California. ¡°Jason Aldean kept playing through three rounds of it. Then once he stopped everyone took it more seriously ¡¦
¡°I started kicking down fences to take shelter behind the buildings.¡±
It sounded like machine-gun fire. Bullets hit concertgoers and sparked off the pavement. Hundreds ran. Others ducked or fell on top of one another.
¡°Two girls hid behind a car with us, right outside the concert,¡± said Desiree Price, from San Diego. ¡°We huddled together. That¡¯s why I have their blood on me. One girl was shot in her leg, the other had it in her shoulder. It didn¡¯t stop so we all ran ? we kept going.¡±
Emily Anderson, also from San Diego, said: ¡°I saw a lady get hit in the leg and her boyfriend dragging her out and everyone was running. It was chaos.¡±
Many said the gunshots sounded as though they were coming from different directions ? and getting closer each time the shooter reloaded.
¡°We were under a big spotlight and someone said, ¡®Turn off the light,¡¯¡± William Walker recalled. ¡°They shut it off and you could see and hear bullets hitting the ground. People piled up behind cop cars, and ex-military guys were saying, ¡®Give me a gun, I¡¯m going to get these fuckers.¡¯¡±
Taking cover under a table, Kevin Kropf, from Orange County, California, waited until tactical police units came in.
¡°I didn¡¯t want to get up because I didn¡¯t want to get mistaken for a bad guy and get shot,¡± he said. ¡°I saw a couple people on the street covered up with sheets, and them loading one girl into the back of a truck. She was definitely dead ¡¦ she looked to be in her mid-20s and whoever she was with, her husband, was in the back of the truck too. He was a mess.¡±
The streets between the concert grounds and the nearest medical center were a non-stop convoy of ambulances and police.
¡°I want to find my friends,¡± said Desiree Price. ¡°I want to go to my hotel room. I want to go home.¡±
She reunited at the Rebel gas station with a friend who had taken shelter with dozens of others in a stranger¡¯s condo.
¡°I¡¯m still shaking,¡± Krista Metz said. ¡°Every time I start thinking about it I start shaking again.¡±
Reports of gunmen and shootings at other hotels circulated on Reddit and Twitter, adding to the chaos and panic. Survivors kept emerging from apartment buildings, motels, parking garages and other emergency shelters. They had nowhere to go, since the Strip remained on lockdown.
¡°We¡¯ve been in the Motel 6,¡± said Jackie Hoffing, ¡°We had stopped in the lobby and thought we were safe, but then they came in and said, ¡®The suspect is here. Everybody has to run.¡¯ It was another stampede. We knocked on a random door and went in there ? about 15 of us ? and hid in the bathroom for two and a half hours.
¡°I was texting my children. I thought we were going to die. I told them, ¡®I love you.¡¯¡±
A US consular official was shot in Guadalajara, Mexico, on Friday night, prompting the FBI to offer a $20,000 reward for information that leads to identifying the suspect.
On Saturday morning, Mexico¡¯s federal attorney general¡¯s office said in a statement that it was working with the US embassy ¡°to find the those responsible for this unfortunate event¡±. It added that sate and federal authorities had been assigned to protect the victim, who is in a stable condition.
A consulate spokesperson told the Guardian: ¡°We are working closely with Mexican law enforcement in this matter. The FBI is offering a $20,000 reward for information leading to the identification of the shooter. Due to privacy considerations we have no additional information to share at this time.¡±
Guadalajara¡¯s El Informador newspaper reported that the victim, not named in the report or by the consulate, was being treated at a local hospital for a gunshot wound in the upper chest.
CCTV footage released by the consulate showed a well-built, light-skinned man in gym clothes paying at a machine for a parking ticket at 6.16pm. He was immediately followed by a man in a purple T-shirt.
A second video shows the man in purple loitering by the car park exit before pulling out a pistol, firing once and running away.
¡°The FBI offers a reward of $20,000 for information that leads to the identification of the subject who shot a United States consular official today in Guadalajara,¡± the consulate said in a statement.
¡°Please call the United States embassy in Mexico City if you recognise him at (01-55)5080-2000.¡±
A source within the Guadalajara police force, who asked not to be identified because he was not authorised to publicly discuss the case, said the victim was 31-year-old Christoper Nolan Ashcraft. The source said authorities found Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) credentials in his name and that he was driving a black Honda Fit when he was shot as he left the city¡¯s Plaza Sania mall.
A LinkedIn profile for Christopher Ashcraft identifies him as a foreign service officer at the US Department of State stationed in Guadalajara since June 2015. The profile features a photo that closely resembles the man in the video, but the US consulate declined to comment about the victim¡¯s identity or position.
The police source said he suspected the shooter was a professional killer. ¡°That¡¯s not an easy shot,¡± he said. ¡°He was probably aiming for the head but he missed as he leaned over to put his ticket in the machine.¡±
The case echoes the murder of the DEA agent Enrique ¡°Kiki¡± Camarena, who was abducted outside the US consulate in Guadalajara in February 1985. Camarena was tortured for days at a nearby safe house and his body was found alongside that of his pilot Alfredo Zavala in a remote rural area the next month.
That killing exacerbated tensions between the US and Mexican governments and sparked the biggest investigation in the history of the DEA. The campaign led to the breakup of the Guadalajara cartel, Mexico¡¯s dominant drug trafficking organisation at the time.
The US state department has issued a travel warning to Americans for Jalisco, the western state where Guadalajara, Mexico¡¯s second-largest city, is located. Citing ¡°continued instability¡±, the department prohibits government officials from ¡°intercity travel after hours¡± and from using certain highways or stopping in specific towns.
Another trolley is wheeled into the surgical pit with another stab victim, a young man lying face down with eight puncture wounds in his back and a grape-sized hole in his neck. He groans.
A few metres away a patient who was skewered in his left flank with a screwdriver or knife is having a plastic tube inserted into his lung. If the chest is not re-expanded he could die.
Out in the corridor a man with dreadlocks limps past, trailing flecks of crimson on the tiled floor. He has been shot in the buttocks but there is no exit wound. The bullet is somewhere inside his body. A line of glassy-eyed people seated on a bench barely notice him. Also wounded, they wait in silence for their turn to see a doctor. A distant siren wails louder, heralding more arrivals.
Some would call this a scene from Dante's Inferno. Staff of the trauma unit at Chris Hani Baragwanath hospital, by some measures the world's biggest, call it a quiet night.
The sprawl of wards and clinics at Bara, as the hospital is known, serves more than 3 million residents of Soweto and some of the poorest, toughest parts of Johannesburg. Some nights the unit's queue of wounded stretches out of the corridor and around the building. The vast majority are casualties of crime and traffic accidents. For South Africa the level of carnage is a tragedy. For foreign medical professionals it is an opportunity to learn. "I worked as a paramedic in Germany for nine years and never saw a gunshot wound. Here on my first night I saw 10," says Roman Pawlik, a 28-year-old intern from Munich.
For more than a decade civilian doctors have flocked to Johannesburg to treat a variety and volume of injuries seldom seen in Europe or north America. Now they are being followed by military colleagues. Over the past year medics from the German and British armed forces have worked in South Africa's most violent city, honing skills which could be needed in Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq.
"It's frightening that people come to Johannesburg, our home, as preparation for a war zone," says Feroza Mohammed, a trauma doctor at Bara. But she welcomes the extra sets of hands. There is a dire shortage of skilled surgeons.
Four German military doctors have worked at Bara, usually one at a time in three-and-a-half-month stints. The head of the unit, Elias Degiannis, praises them as dedicated professionals.
British military medics work across town at Johannesburg general hospital. Currently there is one from the Royal Navy and two from the army. "Our surgeons have gained valuable experience in trauma and surgical techniques," said a British high commission spokesman.
But a question mark hangs over the scheme's future. Jacques Goosen, the head of trauma at Johannesburg hospital, said he had been notified it would not be renewed when the current British intake ends its tour next month. "In my personal capacity I consider it a great pity. There is mutual benefit and that will be lost." A member of the British contingent said Dr Goosen was correct.
There has been no official announcement but it is alleged that the health minister, Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, resented British troops operating in a public hospital. No concern was voiced about the Germans, prompting speculation that British involvement in Iraq, a war unpopular with the ruling ANC, prompted the objection. A health ministry spokesman, Sibani Mngadi, said the minister had requested information about the British presence but had not issued any directive to cancel it.
But the British Ministry of Defence said a new batch of medics would travel to South Africa in the new year: "The medical training programme has not been cancelled or postponed." A request to visit the British at Johannesburg hospital was denied and it was not possible to reconcile the contrasting statements about the scheme's future.
The night spent at Bara's trauma unit leaves no doubt that military surgeons have much to learn from a city which last year recorded 694 murders and thousands of serious assaults. Recorded crime has plunged - from nine gunshot patients a day in 1994 the hospital is down to two - but it remains one of the world's highest rates, and can evoke battlefield conditions.
Staff tie blue plastic bags around their shoes to avoid bloodstains and put stickers marked "urgent" on the foreheads of the most seriously wounded. "It can get so sweaty that the stickers slide off," says Sarah Asbury, 28, a civilian Scot here to specialise in trauma. "Thankfully in Britain we don't have such a need for it."
After a relatively quiet start the pace picks up after 2am with the arrival of a man with his skull cleaved open to expose his brain, a man with four machete-type hacks to his head and an unconscious youth with the grotesquely swollen features of one repeatedly smashed in the face with a blunt object.
The gunshot victim is lucky. An x-ray shows the bullet is lodged in his left femur but there are no fractures. "Why was he shot? Maybe he was robbing someone. I don't want to know, that's not my job," says Todor Rosic, 40. The surgeon, originally a Montenegrin Serb from the former Yugoslavia, says he is training German medics bound for Kosovo who "end up treating my people who are being attacked by Albanians".
By 3am the floor is sticky with red blotches and Gary Dos Passos, 28, is trying to insert a tube into a drunk with serious head injuries who is hysterical and has to be restrained by four nurses. The patient loses consciousness and the room goes quiet as the doctor fights to save him. The danger passes. "Phew, had me worried there for a minute," Dr Dos Passos says with a tight smile.
By 5am daylight is seeping through the frosted windows and still the patients come, a line of bloodied and broken bodies. They resemble battlefield casualties but what brings most of them here are alcohol-related brawls, robberies and accidents. "We should get sponsorship from the beer companies," says Dr Rosic. "This gunshot was brought to you by ... "
Eight years ago it was estimated there were at least 875m guns in the world. Today, if you include antique and homemade guns, that number is probably greater, fed by gun and ammunition industries across more than 100 countries. Police forces worldwide are said to have about 26m firearms. Armies are thought to hold about 200m. Civilians, though, claim the rest and are by far the biggest owners of guns. About 12bn bullets are produced every year, almost enough to kill every person on the planet ? twice.
Estimates suggest there are about 600,000 violent deaths annually ? 340,000 of these are thought to be at the end of a gun. If you take into account that, at a bare minimum, for each person shot and killed, three will survive, about 1,360,000 people are shot by someone else every year.
Such global figures mask regional horrors. In Puerto Rico, for instance, about 95% of homicides are committed with a firearm. Brazil, with more than 35,000 gun homicides a year, has the most firearm deaths in the world. And San Pedro Sula, in Honduras, has the burden of being known as the most violent city in the world outside a war zone, with a murder rate of 173 per 100,000. This weekend¡¯s gun battle between rival biker gangs in Waco, Texas, underlines the fact that in certain areas of the US, gang homicide rates are over 100 times the murder rate among the wider population. Without a doubt, the right to bear arms fuels this extremely high level of violence. To put these figures in perspective, the England and Wales homicide rate is less than one per 100,000, with only 5% of those killed by guns.
The majority of those shot are men. Globally, male homicide rates are almost four times that of women. Women account for the majority of domestic violence gun killings, but in some places, the gender disparity in terms of overall armed violence is stark. The World Health Organisation reported in 2014 male homicide rates at about 11 times greater than female rates in Brazil, 14 times in Honduras and 18 times in Venezuela. In Venezuela, 90% of those killings were with a gun.
The WHO estimates that more than 800,000 people kill themselves each year, and one commonly used way is with a firearm. There are no concrete figures on how many people shoot themselves globally, but we know the prevalence of guns in a society affects how people choose to take their lives. So in England and Wales, with its tight gun laws, only 2% of suicides are gun deaths. In the US, with almost as many guns as there are people, gun suicides account for the majority of all suicides ? more than 20,000 a year. Indeed, there were 92 American children under the age of 14 who shot themselves in 2011.
Guns play a role in this. In 2006, the Israeli Defence Force witnessed a disturbing number of suicides in its ranks. In an effort to reduce this number, the IDF banned soldiers from taking rifles home on the weekends. Suicides fell by 40%. An army review later concluded: ¡°Decreasing access to firearms significantly decreases rates of suicide among adolescents.¡±
The US has more guns per person than any other country in the world. Stemming from a constitutional right to bear arms, it has given birth to an industry that in 2013 helped sustain a quarter of a million jobs, directly or indirectly, creating $38bn in annual economic activity.
Today, at almost 140,000, there are about 10 times more federally licensed sellers in the US than there are McDonald¡¯s. They have plenty to sell ? more than 10.8m guns were manufactured in the US in 2013, a 220% rise from a decade before. This does not include the 5.5m guns imported into the US that year.
Where there are more guns, there are more gun deaths. The US has the highest per capita rate of firearm murders of all developed countries. While figures are hard to come by, data from the Center for Disease Control shows that in 2013 there were as many as 100,598 non-fatal intentional shootings in the US (the lowest estimate was 23,842). That year saw 33,636 fatal shootings (including suicides).
The data offers stark reading. In 2013, FBI figures show 1,075 people under the age of 19 killed by guns in the US, 37 of them under five years old. More American teenagers and children were killed that year by gunfire than US military in any given year in Iraq or Afghanistan.
As guns have evolved through the centuries, so too have medical responses to the injuries sustained from them. In the 14th century, gunpowder¡¯s harm caused doctors to believe bullets were contaminants. This led to the practice of burning the wound to rid the body of poison. By the American war of independence (1775-83) surgeons were suggesting that, if a gunshot wound was to be sewn up, a piece of onion was best put inside, and the wound reopened after one or two days.
By the Crimean war of the 1850s, though, Florence Nightingale¡¯s efforts to clean hospitals had a notable impact on patient mortality, which dropped from 52% to 20%. Joseph Lister¡¯s experiments applying carbolic acid to wounds also helped reduce death rates. And Roentgen¡¯s development of the X-ray in 1895 helped pinpoint fabric, bullets and bone fragments. The impact of these discoveries was revolutionary: research into the Spanish-American war in 1898 suggests that 85% of US casualties survived.
Medical innovations in gunshot trauma continues today. Tranexamic acid, used to ease heavy menstrual flow, has also helped save the lives of haemorrhaging gunshot patients. Syringes containing tiny sponges can stem a gunshot wound in seconds.
We¡¯ve seen that where there are more guns, there are more gun deaths; Iceland, however, is different. About 1% of the Icelandic population belongs to a gun club, and an estimated 90,000 guns exist in this land of about a third of a million people, putting it about 15th in the world ranking of guns per capita. But whereas in 2012, 47,136 people were murdered in Brazil and 14,827 people were estimated killed in the US, only one person died violently in Iceland.
So rare an event is murder that when, in 2013, a 59-year-old man was shot dead by Icelandic police, the incident was a major scandal, mainly because it was the first time the country¡¯s police force had shot and killed anybody, ever. The fact that the police generally do not carry guns, a small population, strict gun registration laws, a close-knit community spirit, and a liberal punitive legal system partly explain why Iceland¡¯s unusual relationship with guns.
Much is made about the bloody impact of assault rifles and high-powered guns. Mother Jones reported that between 1982 and 2012 over half of the 62 US mass shooters examined killed using guns with high-capacity magazines, assault weapons, or both. The reality, though, is that pistols and revolvers are used in the vast majority of gun killings. In Sao Paulo, one report found 97% of firearm murder weapons were handguns. FBI data from 2012 shows over 90% of gun murders in the US where the firearm was identified were with handguns. We might well focus on semi-automatic rifles being used in shootings, but it¡¯s the handgun we should really be worried about.
Many studies have concluded that having a gun in the marital home puts women at greater risk than men. In the US, women are estimated to be 11 times more likely to be murdered with a gun than women in any other developed country. Perhaps this is not that surprising when you take into account that only nine states in the US prevent people jailed for stalking from buying a gun, once they are released. In 2014, it was estimated that almost 12,000 convicted stalkers in the US were still permitted to carry a gun under federal law. American gun control pressure groups, like Everytown, also claim the presence of a gun makes it five times ¡°more likely that domestic violence will turn into murder¡±.
Despite this, gun lobbyists push the line that a gun makes a woman safer. Wayne LaPierre, the executive vice-president of the National Rifle Association, has said that ¡°the one thing a violent rapist deserves is a good woman with a gun¡±. And gunmaker Glock¡¯s Wrong Girl advert, where a young woman foils a would-be attacker, explicitly extols that fact. This despite the fact that, as a comprehensive American scientific review concluded: ¡°There is compelling evidence that a gun in the home is a risk factor for intimidation and for killing women in their homes.¡±
In July 2014, a US government report found 43% of the serial numbers of 474,823 weapons given to the Afghan national army by the US Department of Defense could not be accounted for or had been duplicated. In Iraq, the Pentagon lost track of about 190,000 rifles and pistols given to the Iraqi security forces. And this year, US officials claimed the Pentagon was unable to account for more than $500m in military aid to Yemen.
What happened to all of these guns is unknown. But ammunition magazines ¡°identical to those given to Afghan government forces by the US¡± have been found on dead Taliban fighters, and US-made firearms have been captured from Islamic State forces in Iraq and Syria.
It is not just the likes of Isis that has been armed with American guns. About 253,000 US guns are estimated to cross into Mexico annually. The US government also found that 76% of firearms traced in Costa Rica and 61% in Belize in 2013 were either manufactured in or imported into the US.
This wave of guns has had consequences. There were 120,000 homicides estimated to have taken place in Mexico between 2007 and 2012 ? mainly with American guns. About 70% of traced guns there were found to have come from the US. And in the four years following the lifting of semi-automatic firearm restrictions in the US there have been an estimated 2,500 additional homicides in Mexico. Such are the international consequences of America¡¯s love for the gun.
When 13 people were murdered in Aramoana, New Zealand, lifetime gun licences were replaced by 10-year ones. The massacre of 16 in Erfurt, Germany in 2002 led to the psychological screening of buyers under the age of 25. And in Australia in 1996, the Port Arthur massacre paved the way for a general ban of semi-automatic weapons and a nationwide gun buyback scheme.
Such is the trend globally: a mass shooting leads to a public debate about the need for tighter gun controls and politicians respond.
The US, though, is the only country in the world where, following a mass shooting, the nation has responded with loosening, not tightening, gun laws. After 23 people were killed in a mass shooting in Texas in 1991, the state pushed through a law permitting the carrying of concealed weapons. Even the murder of 26 children and adults at Sandy Hook Elementary School in December 2012 saw a call for fewer, not more gun law restrictions. It was reported a year later by PBS that 27 American states had passed 93 laws expanding gun rights, including measures that let people carry concealed weapons in churches and campuses, or even to use them in self-defence when drunk. Some schools even now allow their teachers to go armed.
Has this made the US safer? Many say not. In the 18 months before Sandy Hook, there were 17 gun deaths in US schools. In 18 months following Sandy Hook, 41 deaths were reported.
An Oklahoma company even came up with a solution. They sell bullet-resistant blankets to protect schoolchildren ? a pad that they claim protects against 90% of all weapons used in school shootings.
? Iain Overton is the director of policy and investigations at the Action on Armed Violence charity.
? His book Gun Baby Gun: a bloody journey into the world of the gun, is published by Canongate, price ¡Ì18.99. To order a copy for ¡Ì15.19, go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call the Guardian Bookshop on 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over ¡Ì10, online orders only. Phone orders minimum p&p of ¡Ì1.99.
A 13-year-old boy fatally shot by Columbus, Ohio, police last week was ¡°more likely than not¡± running away from an officer at the time he was killed, according to an independent medical examiner retained by the child¡¯s family.
Attorneys for the family of Tyre King said on Monday that the local coroner¡¯s office completed its autopsy of the child¡¯s body, but the results wouldn¡¯t be made available for at least six weeks. In response to the delay, the attorneys said, Tyre¡¯s family decided to hire an independent forensic pathologist from Michigan to evaluate the number, characteristics and location of the gunshot wounds on Tyre.
¡°Based on the location and the direction of the wound paths it is more likely than not that Tyre King was in the process of running away from the shooter or shooters when he suffered all three gunshot wounds,¡± the examiner, Dr Francisco Diaz, said, according to a statement from the family. Co-attorney Sean Walton told the Guardian in an email that Diaz conducted his examination of Tyre¡¯s body on Sunday. The attorneys didn¡¯t immediately respond to a request for a copy of Diaz¡¯s report.
Tyre was killed last Wednesday at 7.42pm, when authorities responded to a report of an armed robbery of $10 by a group of teenagers. When officers arrived, Tyre was spotted with two other males who matched a description of the suspects and soon fled on foot. As officer Bryan Mason approached King, police said the child removed a BB gun from his waistband, before he was shot ¡°multiple¡± times. Tyre was transferred to a hospital and pronounced dead at 8.22pm.
Mason, a nine-year veteran of the Columbus police division, has since been placed on administrative leave and will receive psychological counseling. Authorities have said Tyre¡¯s BB gun resembled a real firearm, and the police division¡¯s chief Kim Jacobs said her officers ¡°carry a gun that looks practically identical to this weapon¡±.
Diaz found that Tyre, who the examiner noted was 5ft tall and weighed less than 100lbs, died from three gunshot wounds, ¡°any of which could be determined to have been cause of death¡±, according to the family¡¯s statement. The wounds were found on his temple, collarbone and the left flank, the statement said.
Diaz is an assistant professor of pathology at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, according to his LinkedIn page, and since 2001 he has worked as a medical examiner in Wayne County, Michigan. Diaz didn¡¯t didn¡¯t immediately respond to a request for comment. Tia Moretti, public information officer for the Franklin County coroner¡¯s office, confirmed results of Tyre¡¯s cause of death and manner are pending, as toxicology tests won¡¯t be completed for at least six weeks.
Columbus police on Saturday also said Tyre¡¯s friend, Demetrius Braxton, was arrested in connection with the robbery that preceded the shooting. Braxton, 19, was charged with one count of robbery, a second-degree felony. Last week, he told the Columbus Dispatch that Tyre wanted to rob someone for money, and that he was with him at the time of the shooting.
¡°The cops said to get down,¡± Braxton told the newspaper. ¡°We got down, but my friend got up and ran ¡¦ [and] when he ran, the cop shot him.¡± Police claimed in court documents that Braxton was armed with ¡°what appeared to be a black semi-automatic handgun¡±, according to the ABC affiliate in Columbus, and that he was involved in the robbery of a man for $10. Braxton was expected to be arraigned on Monday.
Attorneys for Tyre¡¯s family declined a request by the Guardian on Sunday for an interview. In the statement, the family asked the public to ¡°continue to withhold final judgment until all the facts are known and vetted¡±. The family reiterated its request for an independent investigation and called upon the Columbus police division and Franklin County prosecutor¡¯s office, which has jurisdiction over the city, to be removed from the current probe of Tyre¡¯s death.
¡°The Columbus police department, the City of Columbus and most importantly Tyre King and his family deserve the benefit of an investigation from a law enforcement agency that has no direct impact from the outcome of that investigation,¡± the statement said.
England defender Ashley Cole accidentally shot and wounded a 21-year-old student on work experience at his club's Cobham training ground, it was revealed last night.
The Chelsea left-back was reported to have been "larking about" with a .22 calibre air rifle when he fired at student Tom Cowan from just five feet away.
Sources at Chelsea Football Club told the News of the World how Cowan was treated by medics at the ground and allowed to rest following the incident. But two days later the wound was still weeping and he was tended to again by medical staff.
"It's truly inconceivable that a Premier League footballer could bring a gun to the training ground," a source said. "But Ashley pulled the rifle from a box and started larking about with it in the changing room."
Former Arsenal star Cole, 30, arrived at Chelsea's Cobham training ground in Surrey holding the weapon, complete with a muzzle and nightscope, last week. The incident was witnessed by a dozen members of staff, but Cole claimed he was unaware that the rifle was loaded. Cowan, a Loughborough University sports science student, was at the team's training ground as part of a year's work placement with Chelsea.
On Wednesday, he was called into a three-hour meeting with "deeply worried" Chelsea officials to discuss the accident, and a day later his father, Ronald, a 51-year-old quantity surveyor, held a second meeting at the club where he demanded to know what action would be taken against Cole.
A .22 air rifle is the most powerful type of weapon that can be legally owned in Britain without a licence. Under British law the incident could be deemed actual bodily harm which carries a maximum penalty of five years' imprisonment and an unlimited fine.
Cole, who earns ¡Ì110,000 a week, is reported to have been given a severe dressing down, and has formally apologised to Cowan.
It is not the first time that Chelsea's Surrey training facility has been at the centre of controversy. In December 2009, the club's captain, John Terry, was caught asking for a ¡Ì10,000 cash payment to secure behind-the-scenes tours for various individuals without the permission of the manager.
Terry later claimed that the proceeds of the tours had been given to charity.
? The following correction was printed in the Observer's For the record column, Sunday 6 March 2011. We said the weapon was "complete with muzzle and nightscope". All rifles have a muzzle ? it's where the projectile exits.
On Sunday night, Hunter S Thompson, at the age of 67, took his own life with a gunshot to the head at his home in Woody Creek, Colorado.
The local sheriff, Bob Braudis, an old friend of Thompson's, confirmed the death of the man who once said: "I hate to advocate drugs, alcohol, violence or insanity to anyone but they always worked for me." Yesterday Thompson's son, Juan, who found the body, and his second wife, Anita Thompson, issued a brief statement that made clear that "Dr Hunter S Thompson took his life with a gunshot to the head".
Locals used to the sound of gunfire from the home of the man who had ridden with the Hell's Angels, paid tribute to his neighbourly qualities. Friends could think of no immediate reason for his action although he had been in pain after breaking a leg in Hawaii, "executing a hairpin turn at the mini-bar", as he put it.
Admirers around the world mourned a man who only recently described the possibility of another Bush term as "four more years of syphilis".
"It's not unlike Mark Twain dying," said cartoonist Ralph Steadman, who illustrated his most famous books.
He said that he was puzzled as to why he had invited his son and grandson for the weekend if suicide had been on his mind.
It was as national affairs editor of Rolling Stone that Thompson achieved his international reputation as the founder of "gonzo journalism", a hybrid of fact and fiction, fuelled by the real or imaginary intake of drugs and alcohol.
Countless young journalists aspired to follow in his free booting footsteps but none has ever quite had the elan or stamina of the man portrayed as "Duke" - one of his many pseudonyms - in the Gary Trudeau cartoon strip, Doonesbury.
The first major book was Hell's Angels: A Strange and Terrible Saga, his account of his time with the bikers. His best-known work was Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas and the phrase has since become a standard headline cliche which perhaps now could be retired in his honour.
Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail followed, along with The Great Shark Hunt and the novel, the Rum Diary. Beneath the drug-crazed madness was one of the sanest and most moral of commentators who claimed that his special subject was "the death of the American Dream".
In the 1998 Terry Gilliam film, Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, Thompson was portrayed by Johnny Depp, thus bringing "gonzo" to a new generation. He was also played by Bill Murray in Where the Buffalo Roam.
But perhaps the only person who could really capture the essence of Dr T is now awaiting burial in Colorado.
Shakir Stewart, executive vice president of Def Jam and one of the most powerful figures in hip-hop, died this weekend in an apparent suicide. Police reported that the man who signed Beyonce was found in his bathroom at around 4pm on Saturday, suffering from a self-inflicted gunshot wound. He was taken to Atlanta's Kennestone Hospital where he died later that day.
Though further details have not been released, Def Jam confirmed Stewart's death in a statement yesterday.
"[Def Jam chairman] LA Reid and all of us at Island Def Jam Music Group are deeply saddened by the passing of our dear friend and colleague Shakir Stewart," the statement said. "Shakir was an amazing man in every sense of the word. A truly incredible friend and father who was an inspiration to not only our artists and employees, but to his family and the many people that had the privilege of counting him as a friend. Our hearts and prayers go out to his family at this very difficult time."
Stewart had only recently taken over at the label, succeeding Jay-Z after the rapper's departure in June. Stewart at the time called it his "dream job".
The Oakland, California native began his career in a more humble way, "passing out [concert] fliers at seven clubs a night, seven days a week in 20-degree weather," as he told Billboard this year. He later worked for LaFace Records and Hitco Music Publishing, before joining Def Jam. The artists he was responsible for signing included Ciara, Rick Ross, Young Jeezy, Beyonce Knowles and Karina Pasian.
In interviews after his summer hiring, Stewart spoke of the need for music executives to file "27 hour days". "I see a lot of kids who want to live the lifestyle but don't want to put in the work and do what it takes," he said.
A woman with a young child in her car attempted to breach a White House checkpoint on Thursday, prompting a high-speed chase through the security-heavy streets of Washington that?ended near the US Capitol when police shot her dead.
Government buildings on Capitol Hill were placed on lockdown and members of Congress sheltered in their offices as the incident unfolded.
Capitol police said the woman was chased between the two centres of government, striking a police vehicle shortly before she was stopped. Officers shot the woman dead. The one-year-old child was unhurt.
The car involved in the chase was registered to Miriam Carey, 34, of Connecticut, and law enforcement officials believe she was the driver, the Washington Post reported, citing officials. NBC News also identified the driver as Carey.
Hours after the woman's fatal encounter with officers, the FBI and other agencies were conducting a search of a sprawling condo complex in Stamford, Connecticut, where neighbours say she lived.
Less than three weeks after a fatal shooting at the nearby navy yard left 12 dead, the incident put security forces on full alert and led to the temporary suspension of business in the House of Representatives, where lawmakers were debating the government shutdown.
The incident began at about 2.10pm ET when the woman attempted to get past an outer security checkpoint at the White House. She was challenged by secret service officers, and a police chase ensued. At one point, police cars surrounded the vehicle, but the woman reversed into one of them and drove off again. The chase eventually ended 1.7 miles from the White House, the US Capitol,?where the woman was shot.
Witnesses?reported hearing several "loud bangs¡± outside the Capitol complex.?Video later emerged of a black sedan being chased at speed around the heavily-guarded roads close to the US Senate buildings.
"We heard three, four, five pops," said Senator Bob Casey, a Democrat who was walking from the?Capitol?to an office building across the street. Police ordered Casey and nearby tourists to crouch behind a car for protection, then hustled everyone into the?Capitol, according to the Associated Press.
"There were multiple shots fired and the air was filled with gunpowder," said Berin Szoka, whose office at a technology thinktank overlooks the shooting scene.
Cathy Lanier, chief of the Metropolitan police department in Washington, said the incident was not an accident and that the suspect attempted to breach two security barriers. "This was a lengthy pursuit," Lanier said.
Capitol police chief Kim Dine said the two scenes were quickly secured after a short security lockdown meant hundreds of government staff were told to ¡°shelter in place¡±. He told reporters on Capitol Hill:?¡°We have no information that this was related to terrorism or is anything other than an isolated incident."
He confirmed that a Capitol police officer was hurt. The injured officer was evacuated by a helicopter which landed on the lawn in front of Congress. The officer was not seriously injured.
The Associated Press contributed to this report
A Georgia Tech police officer overreacted by firing a gunshot that killed an LGBTQ student activist who investigators say was armed with a knife and ignored commands to drop it, a lawyer for the family said on Monday.
Campus police killed Scout Schultz, 21, who they said was advancing on officers with a knife. Schultz refused to put down the knife and kept moving towards officers late on Saturday outside a dormitory, the Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI) said in a statement.
¡°Officers provided multiple verbal commands and attempted to speak with Shultz who was not cooperative and would not comply with the officers¡¯ commands,¡± the agency said in a statement. ¡°Shultz continued to advance on the officers with the knife.¡±
Attorney Chris Stewart told the Atlanta Journal-Constitution he thought Schultz was having a mental breakdown and didn¡¯t know what to do. Stewart and the student¡¯s family planned a news conference on Monday morning.
WSB-TV reported that the item involved, still on the ground when its news crew arrived, appeared to be a ¡°metal, flip-open, multi-tool knife¡±.
Authorities did not immediately identify the officer who shot Schultz or release the 911 call that led to the confrontation. Preliminary information indicates that the initial call reported a person with a knife and a gun about 11.17pm, the GBI said in a statement.
Georgia Tech on Monday refused to release the 911 call or any personnel or disciplinary reports involving the officers, saying that such information was exempt from Georgia¡¯s open records law.
Schultz was president of Pride Alliance at Georgia Tech. The fourth-year computer engineering student used the name Scout and preferred the pronouns ¡°they¡± and ¡°them¡± rather than ¡°him¡± or ¡°her¡±.
Lynne Schultz told the Journal-Constitution that her oldest child was a brilliant student despite numerous medical issues including depression, and had twice attempted suicide.
Most of Schultz¡¯s stress was related to school, Lynne Schultz said. ¡°Scout was always a perfectionist. They always worried they were going to fail a test but got all As and only two Bs at Tech.¡±
Schultz¡¯s father, William, said his child had a history of depression but he wasn¡¯t aware of any particular difficulties in recent weeks. William Schultz said Scout was a great student with a 3.9 GPA and was on track to graduate early in December.
Scout had spent the summer at home, he said, to decompress after working straight through the two previous summers. After attempting suicide two years ago, Scout Schultz went through counseling and there was no indication anything was wrong when his father dropped him at school last month.
Many questions remained on Monday. GBI spokeswoman Nelly Miles said on Sunday she did not know whether the officer who fired at Schultz was trained in dealing with suspects who have mental disorders.
The GBI, through its Crisis Intervention Team, has trained about 10,000 local, state and federal law enforcement officers since it began in 2004, the Journal-Constitution reported. Atlanta, Roswell, Henry County and now DeKalb are among the agencies that require all of its officers to take the class. Some agencies do not require it.
¡°Why didn¡¯t they use some nonlethal force, like pepper spray or Tasers?¡± Lynne Schultz said.
Police at the Georgia Institute of Technology do not carry Tasers or stun guns but are equipped with pepper spray, a Georgia Tech spokesman told the newspaper.
In May 2015, the University System of Georgia implemented a system-wide campus safety initiative. Among its recommendations: establish a program to review training needs for campus law enforcement at the state¡¯s public colleges and universities. It set a 2016 timeline for establishing the program to identify gaps and develop necessary training programs.
The outcome of those recommendations wasn¡¯t immediately known on Monday. A representative of the university system was looking into the matter.
A 14-year-old boy has been arrested on suspicion of murder after a 32-year-old man was fatally shot in Accrington.
Lancashire police said officers were called to Oswaldtwistle on Wednesday evening following reports that a man had been shot in the chest. The victim was taken to Royal Blackburn hospital where he died a short time later, while the boy, from Accrington, was taken into custody.
Police believe the shooting was an isolated incident and there is no wider threat to local residents, although extra officers were deployed to the area. The man was found to have suffered a single gunshot wound to the chest after the alarm was raised at 8.25pm.
Launching a murder inquiry, DI Pete Danby said: ¡°Firstly my thoughts are with the man¡¯s family at this incredibly sad and difficult time. They are being supported by specially trained officers. We are in the very early stages of our investigation and have a number of officers [making] inquiries.
¡°We think this was an isolated incident and believe there is no wider threat to local residents. However, we have stepped up patrols in the area to offer some reassurance to the community. If you have any information that you think could assist us with our investigation, please contact us immediately.¡±
Anyone with information can call Crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555111 or report any information at crimestoppers-uk.org.
"Warning: shots will be fired during tonight's performance." Oh no. Must they be? Can't I persuade you to reconsider? If there's one thing I like even less than shots being fired during tonight's performance, it's the nervous anticipation of shots being fired during tonight's performance. Like many a victim of hand-held weaponry before me, I put my hands up: I am scared of gunfire in the theatre. Being shot, to my mind, could scarcely be more painful.
Is it just me? We should be able to identify each other easily, we fake-gun-phobes. I'm the one wriggling in discomfort, my fingers poised over my ears, eyes glued to the waggling gun-shaped prop, willing it not to go off ? or to bloody well go off now and get things over with. It's happened repeatedly in the last fortnight. (Gun crime-wise, Britain's theatres make South Central LA look like Henley-on-Thames.) At Mamet's Prairie du Chien at the Arcola, a gunshot warning at the auditorium entrance had me on edge throughout. When the shot was fired out of the blue, I all but went through the roof. (It's unexpected loud noises I can't stand; bursting balloons and champagne corks have a similar effect. Pathetic, isn't it?)
Guns fired in Little Eagles at Hampstead; guns fired in Uncle Vanya, also at the Arcola. There Vanya was, swinging his shotgun hither and yon, out to avenge some property-related slight; and in the audience, I cowered and winced. This particular episode is at least mercifully brief. Theatre-makers aren't always so delicate. I've seen dozens of productions that derive the lion's share of their drama from a brandished pistol. Sometimes, it's justified. Often ? and this is usually in sub-Tarantino tough-guy capers ? it's instant, unearned tension; a way for everyone involved to feel like Joe Pesci without doing the spadework.
If you're cursed with my phobia, it can compromise your evening. Screeds of dialogue have passed me by over the years, as I've sat with fingers in lugs, anticipating gunfire. That's not irrational. If there's a gun being toted in one's vicinity, one seldom focuses elsewhere. And to be nervous of guns is a survival instinct, right? Just ask the actor David Birrell, accidentally shot in the eye with a fake pistol during a performance last year of Sondheim's Passion at the Donmar. Guns ? even stage ones ? are dangerous things.
But it's not the danger that bothers me, it's the ear-splitting, heart-juddering pop. In a real-life held-at-gunpoint scenario, I reckon I'd be fine ? given that, if the bullet was fired, either death or extreme pain would presumably take my mind off the noise. But at the theatre, where there's no such consolation, I'm happiest when I get less bang for my buck.
A police force has admitted failings in the handling of the murder of the notorious criminal John ¡°Goldfinger¡± Palmer after officers mistook six gunshot injuries for surgery wounds.
At an inquest into Palmer¡¯s death, DCI Stephen Jennings of Essex police said officers did not properly inspect the gangster¡¯s dead body as it lay in the garden of his home in South Weald, nor did they conduct appropriate background checks that would have revealed his high-profile criminal background.
As a result, Palmer¡¯s death was not treated as suspicious until six days after he died.
Palmer, who was 64 when he was killed on 24 June 2015, was cleared of handling proceeds from the ¡Ì26m Brink¡¯s-Mat bullion raid at Heathrow in 1983, but his alleged involvement earned him the nickname Goldfinger.
He was jailed in 2001 for an estimated ¡Ì33m timeshare fraud, and served half of an eight-year sentence. He spent the last eight years of his life on bail following his arrest in Tenerife in 2007 where he was charged with fraud, firearm possession and money laundering.
After a short hearing in Chelmsford, the coroner, Caroline Beasley-Murray, concluded that Palmer had been unlawfully killed. The police investigation into his murder is ongoing. A separate inquiry by the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) into Essex police¡¯s handling of the case is also ongoing.
¡°There were failings on behalf of Essex police,¡± Jennings told the inquest. ¡°The body was not completely searched and relevant intelligence checks were not taken which would have identified his lifestyle of criminality.¡±
He said 700 lines of inquiry had been opened and 200 witness statements had been taken as part of the investigation. The force believed the murder had all the hallmarks of a ¡°contract-style killing¡±, he added.
Considering motives for taking out a hit on Palmer, the investigation has looked at his criminal past, including his links to the Brink¡¯s-Mat robbery. Palmer was also connected to some of the men convicted for their roles in the more recent Hatton Garden diamond heist.
There were 16,000 victims in the timeshare fraud case, which Jennings described as ¡°16,000 motives¡± to kill.
Jennings told the inquest that Palmer had gall bladder surgery on 17 June 2015, five days before his death, and initially his injuries were believed to be linked.
Palmer¡¯s home was remote and set amid three acres of land with fencing around the property, Jennings said. CCTV footage showed Palmer using a motorised buggy in his grounds at 5.18pm. He was found lying dead in the grass by his son¡¯s partner after stumbling about 15 metres from the site of the shooting.
After a postmortem concluded the cause of death was gunshot wounds to the chest, Essex police launched a murder inquiry. Detectives discovered a small hole drilled in the perimeter fence of the property, which they believe was used by Palmer¡¯s killer to spy on his movements.
The gun used was an 8mm pistol with .32 calibre and most likely had a silencer fitted, Jennings said, adding that Palmer had been burning paperwork in the corner of his garden when he was shot.
The investigation will continue in 2017, Jennings said. ¡°The search is not just for the gunman but for the person who wanted someone to kill him.¡±
Ashley Thilthorpe, the partner of Palmer¡¯s daughter, was the only relative to attend the hearing.
A gunshot, some swearing, and the grunted instruction to ¡°shuffle off this mortal coil¡±. If that was all that had been caught on his fellow marine¡¯s body camera, then perhaps Sgt Alexander Blackman might not have ended up facing a murder charge for shooting a wounded Taliban insurgent dead in 2011.
But it wasn¡¯t. He was also taped reminding the rest of his patrol to be discreet, because by failing to treat their captive as a casualty, ¡°I¡¯ve just broke the Geneva convention¡±, and at that point the case for prosecution could not have been clearer. It¡¯s perhaps the only thing that is clear, however, about this murky and haunting case.
This week, following a dogged campaign by his wife, Claire, Blackman¡¯s murder conviction was downgraded to manslaughter on grounds of diminished responsibility. He is not exonerated, but will almost certainly soon be freed, having already served three years in jail. Three eminent psychiatrists testified at his appeal that at the time of the shooting in Helmand province, Blackman was suffering from a condition where the chronic build-up of extreme stress drastically impairs judgment. A century ago we might have called it shellshock rather than adjustment disorder but whatever it¡¯s called, a life sentence does not seem the humane response.
So justice, of a muddled sort, has been done for his family; the Daily Mail, which campaigned with characteristically relentless efficiency to clear his name, has its victory; and a political line is drawn beneath what had started to look like a terrible moral quagmire. Move along, nothing to see.
Theresa May¡¯s government is clear that it abhors what it regards as the hounding of soldiers long after the war is over. The public disgrace of Phil Shiner, the human rights lawyer who made a career of aggressively pursuing even the flimsiest cases against British soldiers, plus a broader tabloid campaign against so-called ambulance-chasing lawyers, have turned the tide of public opinion and the Iraq Historic Allegations Team, the panel set up to investigate alleged abuses of civilians in the Iraq war, is to be wound down.
And millions will, of course, be only too happy to move on. They will shed few tears for some dead Taliban fighter, hit by Apache helicopter fire while trying to storm a British base ? so what if a soldier finished the job, finding him barely alive? It¡¯s nothing they wouldn¡¯t have done to him, as Blackman himself said. Those convinced that the entire conflict was a British war crime may meanwhile struggle to muster much interest in the case of a single soldier.
But this case raises questions too disturbing to be tidied under the carpet, and that¡¯s why it sharply divides opinion, among military personnel as well as civilians. For those best placed to understand exactly how Blackman felt ? nerves shredded by months of ambushes, still grieving the deaths of two marines to whom he had been close ? it is, intriguingly, rather more complicated than belligerently standing up for ¡°our boys¡± no matter what. Because if Blackman cannot be held solely responsible for this shot, who else should share the blame?
The easy answer, perhaps, is all of us. That¡¯s arguably what the military covenant ? the unwritten understanding that a nation owes a debt to those prepared to fight and die for it ? means, regardless of whether this war was in your name or not. The Blackman case is a reminder that a nation cannot run away from the consequences of asking people to kill on our behalf, and that aggression cannot always be turned on and off like a tap.
As one of the psychiatrists who examined Blackman told the hearing, the trouble with expecting soldiers to function as coolly as machines, even when pushed to their physical and psychological limits, is that Rambo ¡°only exists in the cinema¡±. Under pressure, humans crack.
And in parts of Helmand that pressure was hellish. Asked on the Today programme if anyone was in their right mind by the end of that tour, former marine Rob Driscoll ? who also served in J Company, of which Blackman was a member ? responded frankly. ¡°No.¡± War in general, and perhaps this insurgency in particular, creates precisely the conditions for behaviour most civilians would regard as beyond the pale.
Yet that is, of course, exactly why the rule of international law exists. Surrender to the argument that the hot bloody mess of battle is no place for lawyers, turn a blind eye to what feel like relatively understandable crimes, and worse ones follow.
But if the law is a necessary weapon of last resort against war crimes, the first line of defence should be tight military discipline. And that is what makes the evidence of former Colonel Oliver Lee, who took command of Blackman¡¯s company only eight days before the killing, interesting.
In his view, J Company was ¡°out of control¡±, adopting increasingly violent tactics at odds with the official strategy; his reported evidence to the appeal cited evidence of ¡°abuse and mistreatment¡± of local civilians and of bad behaviour among senior officers.
He is, he says, no apologist for what Blackman did. But, crucially, he blames failings higher up the command chain for failing to stop the unit going rogue. Lee, who resigned from the navy in protest over its handling of the case, says he was blocked from testifying at the marine¡¯s first trial ? he gave evidence to the appeal only after leaving the army ? and this week¡¯s verdict makes it less likely that such dirty laundry will be aired publicly again. Move along, there¡¯s nothing to see.
And it would be easy just to turn the page, stop thinking about the things no civilian much wants to think about ? the unspeakable savagery witnessed by some in Iraq and Afghanistan, the suspicion that Blackman may not have been alone in doing terrible things under that pressure. Easier to carry on pretending soldiers can endure things that would tip the rest of us over the edge, all the while behaving with the stiff-upper-lipped nobility of British officers in the Somme, organising jolly Christmas Day football matches with the Germans.
But you don¡¯t have to believe Blackman is a hero to accept his supporters¡¯ argument that serious questions remain; or to wonder whether what the camera saw, damning as it undoubtedly is, is only a fragment of a story still waiting to be told.
A gunman described by Florida police as ¡°a disgruntled employee¡± shot dead five former colleagues at a business in suburban Orlando on Monday before killing himself, investigators said.
John Robert Neumann Jr, 45, entered the premises of Fiamma, a manufacturer of awnings for recreational vehicles, at about 8am, armed with a semi-automatic pistol and a large hunting knife, said Orange County sheriff Jerry Demings at an afternoon press briefing.
Demings said that Neumann, a US army veteran who was fired from the company for undisclosed reasons in April, began shooting almost immediately then moved through the building purposefully, ¡°singling out the individuals that he shot¡±.
¡°Most of the victims were shot in the head, some multiple times,¡± Demings said. ¡°He had a plan of action and he executed his plan today.¡±
The victims, four men and one woman, were all employees of the family-owned company in north-east Orlando and ranged in age from their early 30s to their 60s, Demings said.
Detectives interviewed eight uninjured witnesses whom the sheriff described as ¡°survivors¡±, including one woman, a temporary employee, who was not known to the killer and who was spared.
¡°He pointed a firearm at her and told her to get out of the business,¡± Demings said. ¡°The indications are that the subject reloaded the firearm at least once during the spree this morning.¡±
Deputies arrived within two minutes of a 911 call reporting an active shooter and found three men and the woman dead at the scene. The fourth male victim was taken to the Orlando regional medical centre with gunshot wounds but died there.
Demings said Neumann did not use the knife and appeared to have shot himself as deputies prepared to enter the building.
The sheriff named four of the five victims as Robert Snyder, 69; Brenda Montanez-Crespo, 44; Kevin Clark, 54; and Jeffrey Roberts, 57. Relatives of the other victim had not yet been informed.
Orange County detectives, assisted by FBI agents, were looking into the background of Neumann, who according to Demings received an honourable discharge from the army in 1999 and lived alone.
¡°In terms of motive, we have information that at least one of [the victims] he had a negative relationship with,¡± Demings said.
At an earlier briefing the sheriff said Neumann had a criminal history ¡°minor in nature¡± including possession of marijuana and DUI, and that officers were called to Fiamma in June 2014 when Neumann allegedly assaulted a colleague.
¡°This is likely a workplace violence incident,¡± Demings said. ¡°It appears this incident has nothing to do with any global terror activities. He was a disgruntled employee who came back to this business this morning.
¡°We have no indication that this subject is a member of any subversive-type organisation or terror organisation.¡±
The sheriff said a search warrant was being prepared for Neumann¡¯s residence and that the subject appeared not to have held a licence to carry a concealed weapon.
An FBI spokesman, Ron Hopper, said members of the agency¡¯s terrorism taskforce attended the scene as a matter of routine.
¡°As we would in any active shooting situation, the FBI responded in force,¡± he said. ¡°We will remain with the sheriff¡¯s department until our resources are no longer necessary.¡±
A later statement from the FBI¡¯s Orlando office confirmed that agents had ¡°determined there to be no direct nexus to terrorism¡±.
Rick Scott, the Florida governor, issued a statement noting that the incident came close to the first anniversary of the Pulse nightclub shooting in Orlando that left 49 dead.
¡°Over the past year, the Orlando community has been challenged like never before,¡± he said. ¡°I have been briefed by our law enforcement officials on this tragic incident and Ann and I are praying for the families who lost loved ones today.
¡°I ask all Floridians to pray for the families impacted by this senseless act of violence. I will remain in contact with the Orlando law enforcement community throughout the day as more information is made available.¡±
Teresa Jacobs, the Orange County mayor, also referred to the Pulse shooting in expressing her condolences. ¡°Unfortunately, we¡¯ve seen this play itself out in our community and other communities across the nation,¡± she said.
¡°It¡¯s incumbent on all of us not to become complacent or callous to these horrific situations but for each of our citizens to be vigilant.¡±
A murder investigation is under way after a former junior world kickboxing champion was shot dead in a ¡°cold-blooded, targeted attack¡± outside a chip shop in Liverpool.
Witnesses said Aaron Lewis appeared to have been shot nine times outside Anna Jung¡¯s in Grosvenor Road, Wavertree, at about 7pm on Wednesday.
A short time later, a 19-year-old man believed to have been with the victim admitted himself to hospital with a gunshot wound to his upper body.
The shootings took place as a Crimestoppers campaign was launched to tackle gun crime in Merseyside, following the first rise in firearms incidents in three years.
Lewis, from Toxteth, is believed to be the son of the former world champion kickboxer Alfie Lewis, who runs the Mushin Kai freestyle karate club in Liverpool.
Aaron Lewis was once a promising young athlete and won a gold medal in the world kickboxing championships aged 12.
He is the fourth man to be shot dead in Liverpool since April 2016. Last week, Thomas Baker, 44, from Everton, was shot while leaving his gym near the meat and fish market in the Old Swan area of the city. He was later pronounced dead.
Merseyside police said Lewis was taken to Aintree university hospital with serious gunshot wounds. He was later pronounced dead.
Detectives believe the attacker ran down Grosvenor Road towards the city centre and have asked for witnesses to contact them.
A woman, who asked not to be named, said she tended to the victim while waiting for emergency services to arrive.
¡°He had about nine shots in him and I held my hands with pressure over the wound while another girl pumped his chest,¡± she told the Liverpool Echo.
Assistant chief constable Nikki Holland of Merseyside police said: ¡°The investigation is in its early stages and extensive inquiries are being carried out to establish the motive and to identify those responsible.
¡°This was a cold-blooded, targeted attack on a residential street that has taken away the life of a young man. The people responsible for this attack knew exactly what they were doing and they need to be caught.
¡°A young man, who should have had his life before him, has been killed and his devastated family are now faced with coming to terms with their loss. His parents and family will now have to live with their grief for the rest of their lives.
¡°There is no place in our city for firearms, or those who use them and bring fear to our communities and our streets. I would urge anyone who saw anything, or who has any information, to contact us urgently.¡±
On Thursday, a Crimestoppers anti-gun crime campaign launched in the city, as part of which a van displaying ¡°emotive imagery¡± will drive through hotspot areas including Speke, Bootle, Norris Green, Wavertree and Old Swan. There will also be targeted social media advertising.
In the nine months since April 2016, there have been 77 firearms discharges in Merseyside, 28 of which resulted in non-fatal injuries and four deaths. That compares with 60 shootings, two deaths and 11 injuries in the whole of the previous year.
The Crimestoppers north-west regional manager, Gary Murray, said: ¡°We want to appeal to local people to tell us who is responsible for these crimes, without fear of repercussion, but we also need to find out where these guns are being stored, so that the police can make our streets safer.
¡°We know that picking up the phone or logging on to our site is probably one of the hardest things you¡¯ll ever have to do. But in 28 years, we have never broken our promise to the public that those who contact us will always remain anonymous.¡±
The most recent figures from the Office for National Statistics show there were 7,866 offences in England and Wales in which firearms were involved in the year ending March 2015, up by 2% on the previous year ? the first increase in gun crime in 10 years.
Of these offences, 19 involved fatalities, 10 fewer than the previous year and the lowest since the data series began in 1969.
At least 59 people were killed in the deadliest mass shooting in modern US history on Sunday night, when a gunman opened fire on an open-air music festival from the 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay hotel and casino on the Las Vegas strip.
A further 527 people were injured, Las Vegas police said, as casualty figures continued to rise. The death toll surpassed the shooting at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando in June 2016, when 49 people were killed.
The suspected gunman was identified as Stephen Paddock, a 64-year-old local man who police believe booked into the Mandalay Bay on 28 September. He was found dead after officers stormed his room, where they recovered 17 guns.
A brother of the suspect living in central Florida, Eric Paddock, said he was ¡°dumbfounded¡±. ¡°He¡¯s not an avid gun guy at all,¡± the brother said. ¡°The fact that he had those kind of weapons is just ¡¦ he has no military background or anything like that.¡±
Speaking at the White House, Donald Trump called the attack ¡°an act of pure evil¡±. He did not discuss possible motives for the attack, saying federal and local authorities would provide updates. Nor did he call for new gun control measures or other government action to confront the US epidemic of mass shootings.
¡°America comes together as one and it always has,¡± Trump said. ¡°We call upon the bonds that unite us: our faith, our family and our shared values.¡±
Trump said he would visit Las Vegas on Wednesday and directed that flags outside government buildings be flown at half-staff. He still planned to visit hurricane-devastated Puerto Rico on Tuesday.
The FBI said it had found ¡°no connection with an international terrorist group¡±. The Clark County sheriff, Joe Lombardo, said police had found nothing to suggest a motive for the attack.
¡°We¡¯ve checked all the federal databases and Nevada databases and we have no knowledge of this individual,¡± he said. ¡°I can¡¯t get into the mind of a psychopath at this point.¡±
The Mandalay Bay hotel sits across Las Vegas Boulevard from the Route 91 Harvest country music festival site, where people were watching the final performances on Sunday night when the attack began. Two off-duty officers were among the dead, and the overall toll could rise, Lombardo said.
Quick-response police teams found the gunman¡¯s room when a smoke detector was activated by the gunfire, police said. The suspect had used a hammer or similar device to break hotel room windows to clear his line of fire, Lombardo said. Police said the suspect killed himself before they entered the room.
Witnesses who fled the scene described seeing muzzle flashes from the upper floors of the Mandalay Bay and hearing what they described as sustained automatic gunfire.
¡°It was very obvious it was gunfire coming down into the crowd,¡± said Jackie Hoffing, who lives in Las Vegas. ¡°It was hysteria. There were people trampled. I was with my husband. He stayed with me. We jumped walls, climbed cars, ran for our lives. I¡¯ve never run that hard or been that scared in my whole life.¡±
Desiree Price, who was visiting from San Diego, had blood on her shirt and trousers. ¡°We heard shots like firecrackers,¡± she said. ¡°I helped someone who was bleeding. Two girls hid behind a car with us right outside the concert. One girl was shot in her leg, the other in her shoulder. It didn¡¯t stop so we all ran ? we kept going.¡±
Marilou Danley, a 62-year-old Australian woman identified as Paddock¡¯s room-mate and elsewhere as his girlfriend, was initially named as a person of interest, but police later said she was out of the country at the time of the attack and cleared her of any involvement.
Local officials urged residents to make blood donations. ¡°We need blood, so if anybody could contribute blood, anybody in the Las Vegas area or locally could do that,¡± said Nevada¡¯s governor, Brian Sandoval. Guests at the hotel were allowed to return to their rooms late on Monday morning after being sheltered overnight in a large arena nearby.
The shooting began during a performance by the country music star Jason Aldean. As the 22,000 people in the crowd began to run, the music stopped temporarily and started up again before another round of gunshots sent the performers ducking for cover and fleeing the stage, a witness told the Associated Press.
Jake Owen, a country music star who played the set before Aldean¡¯s, wrote on Twitter that ¡°gun shots were ringing off of the stage rigging and road cases¡±. He suggested that the gunman was aiming at the stage at times. ¡°No one knew where to go,¡± he said.
Many of those who ran from the festival site sought refuge in nearby motels, parking garages and apartment complexes. At a gas station across the street, survivors reunited with friends. Some were teary-eyed and still shaking with fear.
Kevin Kropf, from Orange County, California, said: ¡°I stayed in the venue for a long time until there was nobody else there. I saw a Swat team go in and a Swat team go out. I didn¡¯t want to get up because I didn¡¯t want to get mistaken for a bad guy and get shot. So I was just huddling behind a table.
¡°I saw a couple [of] people on the street covered up with sheets and them loading one girl into the back of a truck. She was definitely dead ¡¦ Whoever she was with was in the back of the truck too. He was a mess.¡±
Flights resumed at the city¡¯s McCarran international airport on Monday morning after all planes were temporarily grounded on Sunday evening.
Las Vegas city hall said it was a ¡°very sad night for Las Vegas¡± and warned members of the public to stay away from the south end of the Vegas strip, where the Mandalay Bay is located. The music festival has been held for the past four years on a 15-acre lot across the strip from the hotel and casino.
Amber Ratto, a paramedic, was a few miles from the Las Vegas Strip when her ambulance got the call on Sunday night: active shooter, at least 20 people shot.
¡°I got goosebumps all over. My heart just sank because I knew this was real, that people had been hurt.¡±
Minutes later Ratto, 26, stepped into the scene of the most murderous mass shooting in modern United States history: an outdoor country music festival with dozens of dead and dying, hundreds wounded and thousands fleeing for their lives.
Amid the chaos Ratto and her colleague, who work for American Medical Response (AMR), a private ambulance company, loaded a husband and wife into the back. The woman had been shot in the head but the husband, shot in the stomach, was in graver condition.
¡°They were in their 50s. He had blood all over him and was holding a dressing to his abdomen. I taped it really, really hard and started multiple IVs to try to keep him alive. His wife was calling their daughter saying they had been shot but that it would be OK. In my head I was thinking, I sure hope so, because I don¡¯t know. His body was completely pale and he was going into shock.¡±
It was the start of a long, terrible night for Las Vegas¡¯s first responders and hospitals ? 59 victims dead, more than 520 wounded and uncertainty over further attacks.
Grisly scenes awaited Ratto at Sunrise Hospital & Medical Center, which resembled a war zone. ¡°Blood just soaking the hallways, everywhere. My guy had to go straight into ER because he was bleeding out internally.¡±
Ratto, covered in blood, and her colleague drove back to the concert site, braced for gunfire. ¡°I turned off the lights in the back of the ambulance to not be targets.¡± Ratto treated people at the concert site and covered the dead. ¡°We had sheets on them. There were so many dead.¡± Ratto spoke in an interview on Tuesday, still uncertain whether ¡°her guy¡± survived.
The killer did not. Stephen Paddock took his own life after raining down havoc with a high-powered arsenal from the 32nd storey of the Mandalay Bay hotel.
Hospitals were left to deal with the consequences.
Robert Smith, a cardiovascular technician at the University Medical Center of Southern Nevada, could tell it was bad even before he reached the emergency room.¡°Blood on the ground in the car park ? trails of blood about 20ft from the entrance. That¡¯s where they were dropping off the people.¡±
Some walked and staggered, moaning and wailing, others lay on stretchers, motionless and silent, all with gunshot wounds or injuries sustained in the scramble to escape.
Some had multiple wounds to the head, face, chest, body, arms and hand, others had just a single wound or abrasions, testament to the indiscriminate fire.
¡°You couldn¡¯t think about your own world, your own problems. You had to focus on the patients to save as many lives as possible,¡± said Smith, 59, speaking on Tuesday during a brief break at the hospital which ended when his pager beeped.
The University Medical Center of Southern Nevada, known as UMC, received about a fifth of the wounded.
It is the only level-one trauma center in Nevada and one of the US¡¯s only free-standing trauma units, an integrated facility permanently staffed with surgeons and trauma nurses, with 11 trauma bays, three operating rooms, a CT scanner and a trauma intensive care unit.
Staff train to handle disasters and mass casualties. Even so, the scale and intensity of the influx on Sunday and Monday stretched them to the limit. Beds, gurneys and wheelchairs swiftly filled, staff had to raid other departments for additional IV tubing, blood pressure cuffs and blankets, and still patients kept coming.
¡°The main challenge was to stay calm and to think straight,¡± said Pat Archer, a lab technician who processed blood samples.
¡°I have no idea who I operated on,¡± Jay Coates, a trauma surgeon, told AP. ¡°They were coming in so fast, we were taking care of bodies. We were just trying to keep people from dying. Every bed was full. We had people in the hallways, people outside and more people coming in.¡±
Huge, horrifying wounds on his operating table told him this shooting was different. ¡°It was very clear that the first patient I took back and operated on that this was a high-powered weapon. This wasn¡¯t a normal street weapon. This was something that did a lot of damage when it entered the body cavity.¡±
Off-duty staff members rushed to the hospital to help. A student nurse who gave her name only as Joanne said she was turned away. ¡°They said I¡¯d be in the way. They were so busy, so focused.¡±
A key challenge was prioritising the wounded ? the loudest and bloodiest are not necessarily the gravest cases. A scale of one to five rates one as the most critical.
Those deemed to have unsurvivable injuries were reportedly placed in a separate area to receive comfort care until they died, a standard practice.
A group of four clinical technicians on a smoking break outside the main entrance disputed that account. ¡°They say that all those who made it here alive are still alive,¡± said one, prompting nods from her colleagues. ¡°All of them,¡± said one.
UMC¡¯s official spokesperson was unavailable for comment.
With staff working marathon hours ordinary residents flocked to UMC to offer cookies and other treats, said Smith, the cardiovascular technician. ¡°No one wanted to eat so there were lines of people coming down the hall looking to help, to give us stuff. My daughter brought water, blankets and donuts.¡±
On Tuesday volunteers manned the reception area offering lifts, toys, treats and comfort. Ashley Schuck, 28, wore a placard: ¡°We stand together. Prayer or hugs?¡± People were opting for both, she said. ¡°This community is blowing it away. This is not Sin City.¡±
Ratto, the paramedic, said she was still processing the horror but felt proud. ¡°So many died but we saved so many. I feel lucky. I have the best co-workers in the entire world.¡±
Not only is the United States the runaway world leader for gun ownership ? it also suffers mass shootings at more than 11 times the rate of any other developed country, according to a 2014 study published in the International Journal of Criminal Justice Sciences.
Here are key statistics pertaining to gun ownership and gun violence in the United States, following the attack at a music festival Sunday night in Las Vegas, the country¡¯s deadliest mass shooting.
This is the gun ownership rate in the United States, the highest by far in the world, according to the UN office on drugs and crime through its annual crime survey for 2012. The No 2 country, Yemen, has 54.8 per 100 people.
This is the proportion of civilian-owned guns worldwide held in the United States. With less than 5% of the world¡¯s population, the United States is home to roughly 35?50% of the world¡¯s civilian-owned guns, according to the Small Arms Survey from 2007.
The number of Americans killed with guns each year. About two-thirds of those are suicides.
The number of people shot each year in the United States, according to a study published in the journal Health Affairs.
Americans overall are ¡°25 times more likely to be murdered with a gun than people in other developed countries¡±, gun control advocates say.
Proportion of gun murders in the United States in which a handgun is the weapon, according to FBI statistics.
Increase in number of handguns owned in the United States since 1994.
Increase in total number of guns owned in the United States since 1994.
Proportion of people who own half of the country¡¯s guns, according to an unpublished Harvard/Northeastern University survey result summary. Anchoring this group are America¡¯s gun super-owners ? an estimated 7.7 million Americans who own between eight and 140 guns.
Total hospital expenses to treat US gunshot victims annually, according to the study. If lost wages and hospital expenses are considered together, the authors said, the annual cost of shootings in the US could be as high as $45bn.
Amount of his own money that one doctor spent to fund gun violence prevention research after political pressure from the National Rifle Association targeted federal funding for public health research on guns.
Proportion of firearm murders among all murders in 2016 ? the highest ever on record in the United States, according to FBI statistics. While murders in the United States are well down from historic highs, gun murders represent a greater share of the overall total.
The number of guns stolen in the United States per year, according to an unpublished Harvard/Northeastern survey result summary. That¡¯s compared with 230,000 a year in a recent estimate from the National Crime Victimization Survey.
The proportion of US men who said they personally owned a gun in 2015, down from 42% in 1994, according to the Harvard/Northeastern study.
The proportion of US women who said they personally owned a gun in 2015, up from 9% in 1994.
The number of US cities and towns accountable for half of America¡¯s gun homicides in 2015, according to a geographic analysis by the Guardian.
The share of the country¡¯s population in those 127 cities and towns. Read further in the Guardian report Want to fix gun violence in America? Go local.
Junior Seau's death by an apparent self-inflicted gunshot wound to his chest adds his name to a growing list of NFL stars who have killed themselves in retirement.
There are little known details about the circumstances of Seau's death, but police have said they have found no evidence of foul play and are investigating it as a suicide.
If so, this will be the second suicide of a retired football star in two weeks, and the third recently that hints at a connection between football's physicality, and long-term brain damage that may result from repeated blows to the head.
Ray Easterling, a safety for the Atlanta Falcons in the 1970s, died on April 19, also of a self-inflicted gunshot wound. Easterling was the lead plaintiff in a lawsuit against the NFL over concussion-related injuries.
Easterling's lawsuit, filed by his attorney Larry Coben last August and joined by more than 1,000 former players, claimed that the NFL "continuously and vehemently denied that it knew, should have known or believed that there is any relationship between NFL players suffering concussions while playing ¡¦ and long-term problems such as headaches, dizziness, dementia and/or Alzheimer's disease that many retired players have experienced."
Another lawsuit, filed on Thursday in US district court in Atlanta by attorney Mike McGlamry on behalf of more than 100 former pro players, claims that the NFL "repeatedly refuted the connection between concussions and brain injury."
In 2011, Chicago Bears safety Dave Duerson, like Seau, shot himself in the chest, leaving a note that he said he wanted his brain donated to be studied.
When doctors examined Duerson's brain they found he had extensive damage from repeated trauma to his head over his years in the league. Researchers at Boston University's Center for the Study of Traumatic Encephalopathy have found ? and testified before Congress ? that repeated concussions in football have long-term effects and can lead to dementia at a young age.
"We don't know what has gone on with Junior Seau, but he could fit the pattern of chronic traumatic encephalopathy, especially with it ending in suicide," Julian Bailes, a Chicago neurosurgeon, told the Guardian.
Bailes has studied the brains of more than 30 former football players as well as wrestlers, boxers and some returning military veterans who sustained repeated mild head injuries.
Bailes added: "These athletes end up having, after they retire, a latency period after which they have problems with failed relationships, marriages, business failures, depression, often drug and alcohol abuse. There can be some form of dementia but they usually end in suicide. And most of it has only been expressed after they've stopped playing their sport."
League commissioner Roger Goodell has in the past made efforts to the make the game safer, tweaking rules that relate to illegal use of the helmet and hits to the head and neck.
Bailes, an NFL fan and former team physician, is supportive of such moves.
"Ultimately what is going to have to happen is they have to take head contact out of the game," he said. "I realize that's much easier said than done. I think that's where we're going with this. Head contact and repetitive blows to the brain are going to have to be removed from the game."
Some players have balked at such moves. "It's football, you know. If people want to watch soccer, they can watch soccer," Troy Polamalu of the Pittsburgh Steelers told the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
But Seau, 43, a San Diego Chargers linebacker who played through multiple concussions during his time in the league, had defended Goodell's efforts. "It has to happen," he told his friend, the Sports Illustrated writer Jim Trotter.
"Those who are saying the game is changing for the worse, well, they don't have a father who can't remember his name because of the game. I'm pretty sure if everybody had to wake with their dad not knowing his name, not knowing his kids' name, not being able to function at a normal rate after football, they would understand that the game needs to change.
"If it doesn't, there are going to be more players, more great players being affected by the things that we know of and aren't changing. That's not right."
Although Seau's behaviour had become erratic in retirement, there were few glaring clues in the immediate run-up to the former Pro Bowl veteran's death. The day before his death, Seau, a gregarious and beloved future hall of famer, texted his ex-wife and three children simply to say: "Love you."
Seau spoke to his distraught mother the day before his death. "He know I heard a bad voice on Wednesday morning," she told the New York Daily News.
In 2010, Seau was in an accident in which he drove his car off of a 30ft cliff after an arrest on suspicion of assaulting his girlfriend. Seau emerged uninjured and no charges were filed, but police initially investigated that incident as a possible suicide attempt.
A 27-year-old football fan is fighting for his life in a Rome hospital following some of the worst football-related violence seen in Italy.
Ciro Esposito was among three Napoli fans taken to hospital with gunshot wounds during violent clashes before Saturday night's final of the Coppa Italia, Italy's equivalent of the FA Cup. A fourth man, Daniele De Santis, was under police guard in hospital accused of attempted murder.
De Santis, 48, is one of Italy's best-known Ultras, the organised fans associated with much of the violence that surrounds the game in Italy. He was reported to be suffering from serious head injuries.
Doctors said the bullet that hit Esposito, a carwash attendant from the Naples suburb of Scampia, went through his lung and lodged in his spine.
Napoli beat Fiorentina 3-1 to take the cup. The match in the capital's Stadio Olimpico was delayed for 45 minutes because of the shootings.
Five police, two stewards and a firefighter were also reported injured in clashes that swirled through the northern part of Rome before the kick-off. Fans of the two sides, some masked or hooded and wielding staves, fought one another and turned on police struggling to keep them apart.
Earlier there had been a clash at a service station outside Rome between Fiorentina and Napoli supporters.
But the worst violence appeared not to stem from the rivalry between the two sides in the final, but from enmity between Napoli and the local side, AS Roma. De Santis, a leader of Roma's Ultras, was found unconscious near a stall he owns on a main road leading into the city.
According to Italian media reports quoting police sources, De Santis was suspected along with others of having ambushed a party of Napoli fans, using smoke bombs. When they responded by attacking him, he was said to have pulled out a gun and begun shooting.
In another version, it was the Napoli supporters who started the violence by assaulting De Santis, well known to other fans by the pseudonym Gastone.
In 2004, De Santis was one of the central figures in an astonishing display of the power wielded by Italy's violent fan groups. He was among the Ultras leaders who ordered that a Roma-Lazio derby be called off after a false rumour was spread that police had killed a child. De Santis was brought to trial in connection with the incident, but the charges against him were timed out by a statute of limitations.
Saturday night's final was also in doubt as Napoli's Ultras pressed for a suspension in view of the shootings. Following talks involving the club's midfielder Marek Ham?ik the game went ahead, but with most of the fans of both sides watching in silence.
In another controversial incident, whistling from the terraces drowned out the singing of the Italian national anthem before the start. The mayor of Rome, Ignazio Marino, called the violence "shameful and intolerable".
US police have arrested a man wielding an assault rifle who entered a pizza restaurant that was the target of fake news reports it was operating a child abuse ring led by Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton and her top campaign aide.
An unidentified 35-year-old man was being held for questioning after police were called to the Comet Ping Pong restaurant in Washington near the Maryland border, said Aquita Brown, a spokeswoman for the Metropolitan Police Department in the nation¡¯s capital.
The suspect entered the restaurant and pointed a gun at a restaurant employee, who fled and notified authorities, police said. The man then discharged the weapon inside the restaurant. There were no injuries.Two weapons were found inside the restaurant and a third one was recovered from the man¡¯s vehicle, police added.
They said the suspect during an interview with investigators revealed that he came to the establishment to ¡°self-investigate¡± Pizzagate, the police statement said. Pizzagate is a baseless conspiracy, which falsely claims Clinton and her campaign chief John Podesta were running a child sex ring from the restaurant¡¯s backrooms.
Police said there was no active investigation of child abuse allegations relating to the restaurant.
A Reuters witness at the restaurant with his one-year-old child said it was crowded when the gunman entered, with many families dining.
Last month, various media outlets, including the Washington Post and New York Times, reported on internet postings that had sparked death threats against the owner of the restaurant.
The attack on Comet was considered an example of how fake news reports that proliferated during the election year impacted people¡¯s lives.
A fake news story was even tweeted by General Mike Flynn, Donald Trump¡¯s pick for national security adviser. In the 3 November tweet he linked to a discredited story that suggested Hillary Clinton and her ¡°crew¡± were involved in child abuse and added the comment ¡°U decide.¡±
After the incident at Comet, the police department said in a statement that it was ¡°monitoring the situation and aware of general threats being made against this establishment.¡±
¡°We¡¯ve directed the staff to notify MPD should they receive specific threats or have concerns about their safety.¡°
The Reuters witness who was inside Comet at around 3pm ET (2000 GMT) said he was paying his bill when he saw a man entering the restaurant¡¯s front door. ¡°It appeared to us he had a long rifle with him. We scattered,¡± he said.
The restaurant began to empty and some staff also exited, according to the witness.
A police department tweet later stated, ¡°Suspect armed w/assault rifle taken into custody.¡±
A teenager accused of killing an 11-year-old boy as he walked across a pub car park admitted that he had "just shot someone", and that he was later cleaned up with petrol to remove gunshot residue on him, Liverpool crown court heard yesterday.
Sean Mercer, 18, an alleged Crocky, or member of the Croxteth Crew gang, is accused of murdering Rhys Jones on August 22 2007, as the boy walked home from football practice.
The court heard that Mercer arrived at a friend's house and told that friend's grandmother "that he had just shot someone and a kid had gone down". Mercer gathered his friends by phoning them on their mobile phones and asked them to meet him that evening, it is claimed.
Mercer and four friends went to an industrial estate in Kirkby, where Mercer's clothes were destroyed and he was cleaned with petrol to rid him of any remaining gunshot residue, the jury heard.
On September 11 2007 police recovered three empty petrol cans from the industrial unit owned by Mercer's friend Melvin Coy.
A silver Specialized Hard Rock mountain bike frame, believed to belong to Mercer, was found by a passerby on waste ground 250 metres (820ft) from the industrial unit a day after the shooting occurred. The bike had the same serial number as Mercer's machine, and was later handed to police following a media appeal. A DNA swab that was taken from the bike showed the cycle had been in contact with Mercer.
The teenager, who was arrested three days after Rhys died, had a prepared statement read by his solicitor putting forward a defence of alibi. At the time of the murder, Mercer said, he was at a friend's house. He refused to answer any questions put to him.
Wayne Brady, 20, the alleged intended target of the bullet that killed Rhys, gave evidence yesterday.
Accused of being a member of the Nogga Dogz gang, Brady told the jury he had asked his two friends - his cousin Kevin Davies, 19, and another boy - to wait for him while he went to speak to his former girlfriend. He said he had wanted to "apologise for some things" to Vicki Smart. His friends waited for him by a container near the Fir Tree pub in Croxteth Park, Liverpool, while he spoke to her.
Brady said: "I heard gunshots. Three, it sounded like three." He said he could tell the direction they were coming from but not exactly where. His friends "dropped their heads down and pedalled as fast as they could away from the pub to the shops". He added: "I got off straight away, I just went the opposite way from where it sounded like they [the shots] were coming from."
The prosecutor, Neil Flewitt, asked: "When did you first find out a little boy had been shot?"
Brady replied: "Vicki pulled up and said there's a kid lying dead on the floor over there." He abandoned his bike and went to a friend's house and was driven back to Norris Green, he said.
Flewitt said one of the defendants, Boy M, 16, accepted most of what was alleged against him. "However, it is his case that he is not guilty of the offences with which he is charged because he was, at all times, acting under duress." He was not exercising free will "but rather was acting out of fear of Sean Mercer who had told him that he had shot a kid and who had demanded his assistance in avoiding detection".
During the course of an interview with the police, Boy M admitted that he had got rid of a hat and gloves that Mercer had left with him.
James Yates, 20, Boy Q, 17, and Boy M are charged with disposing of the murder weapon, alleged to have been a Smith and Wesson .455 revolver.
Gary Kays and Coy, both 25, are accused of providing transport for Mercer after the shooting. All five are accused of disposing of clothing and Boy M with getting rid of Mercer's bike. Boy K, 17, is accused of assisting an offender by disposing of the weapon, and possessing two guns and ammunition. They deny all charges.
The trial, which is expected to last between six and eight weeks, continues.
Police said they may have missed the fact a man was shot dead because he had recently had surgery that had left wounds in his chest.
Essex police said on Thursday they were now treating the death of underworld figure John ¡°Goldfinger¡± Palmer as murder, after classifying it as non-suspicious for six days. The force has referred the matter to the Independent Police Complaints Commission.
The body of Palmer, 64, was discovered by his family at an address in South Weald, Brentwood, on 24 June. Police said on Thursday that officers and paramedics who attended the scene judged the death to be non-suspicious, or that he had died from natural causes.
An Essex police spokesperson said Palmer had injuries to his chest area from recent surgery.
The implication is that the injuries somehow made it harder for police to spot the bullet wound.
The wound was discovered during a postmortem examination and the death reclassified as a murder.
The IPCC said: ¡±We have been informed by Essex police that they will be making a referral in relation to this case.¡±
Palmer was cleared of handling proceeds from the ¡Ì26m Brink¡¯s-Mat bullion raid at Heathrow in 1983. He earned the nickname ¡°Goldfinger¡±.
In 2001, he was jailed for timeshare fraud, after building a multimillion-pound business that cheated thousands of Britons who wanted a holiday home in the sun.
Palmer had spent the last eight years on bail following his arrest in Tenerife in 2007, where he was charged with fraud, firearms possession and money laundering.
DCI Simon Werrett, who is leading the murder investigation, said: ¡°My team would like to speak to anybody who was around Sandpit Lane between 4pm and 6pm on Wednesday 24 June. The area is rural, but is often used by dog walkers and joggers.
¡°Did you see any people or suspicious vehicles in the area? Did you witness anything out of the ordinary?¡±
He added: ¡°Officers are at the scene making inquiries and I would urge anyone with information, no matter how small, to come forward.¡±
Anyone with information should contact Essex police on 01245 282103.
A spate of violence over Fourth of July weekend left more than a dozen people dead and scores injured in several US cities.
In Chicago, more than 80 people were shot over the extended weekend, 14 fatally, according to the Chicago Tribune, which aims to track every shooting in the city.
"It's Groundhog Day in Chicago," said Chicago police superintendent Garry McCarthy at a press conference on Monday, in which he called the level of violence over the weekend "unacceptable".
McCarthy said the department's strategy for combating gun violence over holiday weekends appeared to work Thursday through Saturday, but failed on Sunday when more than 20 people were shot, leaving four dead.
In the 84 hours between mid-afternoon Thursday and early Monday morning, at least 82 people were shot, the Tribune reported.
McCarthy said eight of the incidents involved police being threatened or returning fire. Two teenage boys aged 14 and 16 were shot dead by police, the Tribune reported. All incidents involving police are being independently investigated, as is standard procedure.
The city is all too familiar with the ravages of gun violence. During last year¡¯s Fourth of July weekend, shootings in Chicago left at least 12 people dead and more than 70 injured over the four-day holiday weekend, according to local reports at the time.
Mayor Rahm Emanuel, a long-time advocate of tougher gun laws, has called gun violence the city¡¯s most urgent problem. But despite having some of the nation's strictest gun laws and a mayor who has made the issue a priority, gun violence continues to devastate Chicago.
"The number of shootings and murders that took place over the holiday weekend is simply unacceptable, and points out that we still have work to do," Emanuel said in a statement on Monday. "The solution does not just include policing."
McCarthy blamed the persistent violence in part on lax gun laws, especially in neighboring states, and said harsher punishments for people who commit gun crimes are needed.
"It all comes down to guns," he said. "There's too many guns coming in and too little punishment going out."
In Indianapolis, Indiana, two police officers died in separate incidents following a bloody Saturday morning in which seven people were shot, police said.
Indianapolis metropolitan police department officer Perry Renn was shot and killed during a gunfight on Saturday night and a police officer in Gary, Indiana, identified as Jeffrey Westerfield, was found shot dead in his car by a passing motorist on Sunday morning, the Indianapolis Star reported.
The seven victims shot in Broad Ripple, an area of the city known for its nightlife, were between the ages of 23 and 28, according to a police report.
Meanwhile in Texas, four people were shot and several more injured after a man opened fire inside an arena filled with thousands fans attending the Houston Caribbean Festival on Saturday morning, police said.
Police said a fight broke out on the floor and at least one person pulled a gun and began shooting. The shooter hit four people, including a 16-year-old who suffered a gunshot wound to the head. Several people were injured after the crowd panicked and rushed to exit the venue.
Authorities are asking eyewitnesses to come forward with more information.
In New York City, 12 people were shot, three fatally, in an overnight burst of gun violence that took place Saturday night and Sunday morning, the New York Post reported.
In St Louis, Missouri, three people were killed and several more injured in a series of shootings that took place across the city over the holiday weekend, the St Louis Post-Dispatch reported.
This week, in my country, considered by some of its more embarrassing denizens to be the ¡°greatest country in the world¡±, an outspoken Florida ¡°gun rights¡± advocate left a loaded .45 calibre handgun in the back seat of her car and was promptly shot and wounded by her four-year-old child. Truly a pinnacle of human potential, much like the invention of paper in second-century BC China, or Aristotle holding forth in the Lyceum, or whoever first pointed out that Florida looks like America¡¯s penis.
What do you say about the outspoken Florida ¡°gun rights¡± advocate who left a loaded .45 calibre handgun in the back seat of her car and was promptly shot and wounded by her four-year-old child? I take no pleasure in violence and pain. I¡¯m not happy that Jamie Gilt, 31 ? who has built a thriving web presence on the argument that guns are not only perfectly safe around kids, but necessary for their protection ? left a loaded handgun in reach of her four-year-old son, who then picked it up, aimed it at his mother, and pulled the trigger. I find zero delight in the thought of Gilt¡¯s toddler¡¯s almost certain panic and horror in that moment, nor the guilt he may well carry for the rest of his life (guilt that only his mother deserves). I¡¯m sure being shot in the back really hurts ? even more so when it comes with a side of nationwide liberal schadenfreude.
But I have no interest in letting Gilt off the hook. Her child could just as easily have shot himself, or a passerby, or someone else¡¯s child. With just a few tweaks of location and circumstance, he could have shot my child. Someone else still could, accidentally or with intention ? it¡¯s a possibility you have to consider in a country with so many guns and so few laws regulating them. That¡¯s the macabre truth of parenting in 21st-century America.
I grew up with the same persistent, low-grade fear of gun violence as any American ? my middle school was once locked down because of a shooting at the high school up the street, and I was a junior at that same high school when we watched the Columbine massacre unfold on TV ? but my family didn¡¯t have guns, and we lived in a liberal city so most of my friends¡¯ parents didn¡¯t either. Guns were scary, but for the most part they felt far away.
Growing up here myself didn¡¯t prepare me for how distinctly, viscerally frightening it would be to raise children in a gun-obsessed nation. My step-daughters go to school in a borderline-rural suburb, whereas I was educated in central Seattle. They already know of at least one friend-of-a-friend who was killed in a school shooting. Many of their friends¡¯ parents are gun owners. Not only that, but, over the past few decades, the National Rifle Association has been aggressively and successfully rolling back firearm restrictions, making gun ownership as quick and easy for anyone¡¯s irresponsible, drunk cousin as their meticulous, gun-safety-trained dad. When we send our kids to friends¡¯ houses for sleepovers, it sometimes feels like a leap of faith.
In the US in 2015, more people were shot and killed by toddlers than by terrorists. In 2013, the New York Times reported on children shot by other children: ¡°Children shot accidentally ? usually by other children ? are collateral casualties of the accessibility of guns in America, their deaths all the more devastating for being eminently preventable.¡±
And I¡¯m supposed to believe that frightened Syrian refugees ? or whomever becomes the next rightwing scapegoat du jour ? are the real threat to my children? I¡¯m supposed to be afraid of sharks? Heavy metal music? Violent video games? Horse meat in my hamburger patties? Teenagers pouring vodka up their butts?
States with more guns have more gun deaths. Keeping a gun in your house increases your chances of accidental death by shooting, but does not make you safer. A woman¡¯s chance of being murdered by an abusive partner increases fivefold if the partner has access to a gun. ¡°Good guys with guns¡± are a fantasy. How much longer will we keep participating in this great collective lie that deadly weapons keep us safe?
The accidental shooting of Jamie Gilt is the object lesson that my absurd nation deserves. When even supposed gun safety experts cannot keep themselves safe from their own toddlers, we should take that as an unequivocal reminder that guns are inherently dangerous. They are exploding projectile machines designed specifically for killing. And that¡¯s not bleeding-heart hyperbole ? it¡¯s the explicit reason why many people are drawn to them. Cowboy games. Vigilante justice. Power.
America does not get to claim some hypercivilised global high ground when we foster ? legislatively and culturally ? a system in which incidents such as Gilt¡¯s are not just possible, but inevitable.
A stray foul ball is usually the most dangerous thing a fan has to deal with at the baseball but on Tuesday a fan at a St Louis Cardinals game felt a pain in her elbow ? it later emerged a bullet had grazed her arm.
The victim was sitting behind the home team dugout at Busch Park when the incident happened, and other spectators soon realized something was seriously wrong. Todd Porter, who was sat nearby,?told the St Louis Post-Dispatch?that the woman said she thought she had been shot. ¡°We thought she was joking, but everybody turned around and she showed me the blood coming down from her elbow,¡± Porter said. ¡°It looked real purple and red and it looked like there was a hole in her jacket.¡±
The woman found a bullet slug under her seat, and security was called. Police later confirmed they found the slug and had earlier received reports of shots being fired around a mile from the ground. They believed someone may have been firing into the air.
The Cardinals released a statement confirming they were aware of the incident. ¡°There is nothing more important than the safety of our fans, and the Cardinals are grateful that no one was seriously injured,¡± read the statement.
Porter told the Post-Dispatch he was angry the club did not tell fans earlier. ¡°This is terrible,¡± he said. ¡°Someone is shot in the elbow and no one hears about it? Let the public know what¡¯s going on. If somebody out there is shooting, I understand you didn¡¯t want people to get up during the game and run, but at least let people know this happened as soon as possible and know, ¡®We¡¯re sorry to hear it happened to her and checking to find out what happened.¡¯¡±
Incredibly, this is not the first time a Cardinals fan has been shot at a game. In 1965, a gunman held up the ticket office at Sportsman¡¯s Park, which was then the home of the Cardinals, and a stray bullet grazed a teenage fan¡¯s throat. She made a full recovery.
A disturbed man with an AR-15-style rifle walked through a popular historic site in 1996, shooting up the cafe and gift shop. He left 35 people dead and 19 seriously injured.
The country¡¯s conservative leader pushed through immediate, sweeping changes to gun laws. Chief among them was a ban and mandatory buyback of more than 600,000 semiautomatic rifles and other long guns, which were then melted down. In all, one researcher estimates, the government ultimately destroyed about a million weapons ? roughly one-third of its total gun stock.
That was in Australia, a country that has not had another large-casualty mass shooting since. Officials repeatedly ask: why can¡¯t America do the same?
¡°We know that other countries, in response to one mass shooting, have been able to craft laws that almost eliminate mass shootings. Friends of ours, allies of ours ? Great Britain, Australia,¡± Barack Obama said last year after a mass shooting at a college in Oregon.
¡°Certainly the Australia example is worth looking at,¡± Hillary Clinton said that same month.
In an attack on America¡¯s political inaction last week, comedian Samantha Bee asked why one city after another had to have its ¡°turn¡± witnessing a mass shooting. In Australia, she said: ¡°Parliament passed strict gun laws and they haven¡¯t had a mass shooting since then.¡±
One reason America can¡¯t emulate Australia is purely political: American gun rights advocates say this kind of confiscation would prompt ¡°a civil war¡±.
¡°It¡¯s confiscation of private property and the threat of jail, and that¡¯s not the American way,¡± said Philip Alpers, a gun violence researcher at the University of Sydney.
But there are other reasons that Australia is not a good model for how the US can address gun violence. As part of a Guardian examination of what it might take to break the cycle of the American gun control debate, we looked first at how parents of children killed at Sandy Hook elementary school are trying to move the conversation forward ? in part, by fighting for laws that would not have saved their children. Today, we¡¯re looking more deeply at the reality behind America¡¯s gun casualty numbers ? and why allowing mass shootings to define the debate may get in the way of saving lives.
In the US, more than 10,000 Americans will likely be killed in gun murders this year. Another 20,000 will likely be lost to gun suicide. The total number of gun deaths and violent injuries will be close to 100,000.
Even before the ¡°big melt¡±, as one Australian gun researcher put it, Australia¡¯s per capita rate of gun homicide was much lower than America¡¯s. Handguns were already strictly regulated.
In 1995, before it implemented sweeping gun buybacks, Australia saw 67 gun murders, fewer than last year¡¯s total murders in Oklahoma City. After Australia¡¯s buyback of nearly a million guns, at a cost of hundreds of millions of dollars, the nation¡¯s gun murders dropped by nearly half, from 67 to about 30 gun murders per year. Researchers are still debating how much of that drop was attributable to the new gun control policies, since gun murders were already trending down.
The US also has a dramatically larger number of guns. For the US to collect and destroy the same proportion of firearms that Australia did it would require a buyback of 90m firearms, according to a leading Australian researcher, at a cost that might be in the billions if the US paid fair market value for the weapons.
Mass shootings are a growing and alarming phenomenon in the US. By a purely numerical count, the United States has seen more than 1,000 mass shootings in 1,260 days. By a stricter definition, the number is smaller but still sobering: 19 public mass shootings since the Sandy Hook elementary school massacre in December 2012.
But by any definition, they make up only a tiny percentage of the overall toll of gun deaths.
The US could end all mass shootings today and its rates of gun violence would still be many times higher than other rich countries.
Much of America¡¯s day-to-day gun violence is concentrated in America¡¯s poorest, most racially segregated neighborhoods ? places with high rates of unemployment, struggling school systems, and high levels of mistrust between police officers and community members.
African Americans, who represent 13% of the total population, make up more than half of overall gun murder victims. Roughly 15 of the 30 Americans murdered with guns each day are black men.
Gun violence in America, as criminologist Frank Zimring put it, is another regressive tax on the poor. Some black neighborhoods have experienced so much violence that their residents report symptoms of post-traumatic stress at rates comparable to veterans of war.
Because everyday gun violence is concentrated in racially segregated neighborhoods, it¡¯s easy for millions of Americans to think they won¡¯t be affected.
¡°As soon as it¡¯s anybody¡¯s kindergartener that can be at risk, we¡¯re a hell of a lot more terrified, because there is no social class or geographic address that makes one exempt,¡± Zimring said.
America¡¯s gun control debate continues to revolve around the exact circumstances of the shooting that is currently on the news. Is a new gun law worth it, or not? That depends on whether it might have prevented this particular shooting. While this is an understandable, human response, it is a terrible way to go about saving lives.
The shock and horror that follows mass shootings has led to an obsessive focus on the dangers of military-style rifles ? even though rifles of any kind were used in less than 3% of gun murders in 2014, according to FBI data.
A tunnel focus on mass shootings has also fueled the public perception that mental illness is driving gun violence. But experts caution that even miraculously curing all schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depression in American might only lead to a 4% reduction in overall violence.
A debate conducted in the aftermath of mass shootings has also prompted a huge public investment in guarding and fortifying public schools against shootings, even though the typical school can expect to see a student homicide only once every 6,000 years, according to safety expert Dewey Cornell.
Since the 1999 school shooting at Columbine high school in Colorado, the justice department has invested nearly $1bn to help put police officers in schools, though Cornell notes there is still little evidence that school security measures reduce crime.
The political focus on mass shootings sometimes even undermines policies that are aimed at addressing the big picture of violence. Opponents of universal background checks have sought to undermine Democrats¡¯ push for the reform by pointing out that mass shooters¡¯ murder weapons are often purchased legally. But that¡¯s not the point. Expanding background checks on private sales of guns is a strategy designed to help crack down on the illicit market in guns used in everyday gun violence.
A gun debate driven by focus on the most high-profile killings also plays into the hand of the National Rifle Association, whose leaders argued this weekend that tough gun control laws in Europe did not prevent the terrorists in Paris from getting guns.That may be true. But the United States¡¯ overall gun homicide rate is roughly 16 times higher than in France, according to statistics from the FBI and Gunpolicy.org.
To save the greatest number of lives, it¡¯s the everyday violence ? not just the mass shootings ? that we need to prevent.
The unnamed victim, thought to be in his 30s, was shot in broad daylight on the M40 in Warwickshire yesterday afternoon.
He had been visiting the Bulldog Bash, which bills itself as Europe's largest biker festival, at Long Marston airfield, near Stratford.
Warwickshire police said tonight they believed the fatal shot had been fired from a pistol.
Police had completely closed the motorway in both directions to conduct fingertip searches at the murder scene, on the southbound carriageway between junctions 13 and 12 near Leamington Spa. It reopened earlier this afternoon.
Police said the man had been riding with two friends, who were Polish, according to the BBC. Officers have yet to give details of the model of motorcycle he was riding but they have appealed for information about a green Rover 620 car reported by witnesses as driving close to the motorcyclist.
Detective Superintendent Ken Lawrence, who is leading the investigation, said there were many motorcyclists on the road at the time after the four-day Bulldog Bash ended.
He said detectives were scouring CCTV footage from cameras monitoring the motorway, and he appealed to any witnesses who saw the incident or the car travelling northbound along the A46 towards the M40.
Mr Lawrence said police were investigating the possibility that the victim was not British but had lived in the UK for some time. He also said detectives were examining a similar incident six years ago, in which three bikers were shot at on the M40 as they returned from the Bulldog Bash.
"There are similarities but that doesn't mean necessarily that they are linked," Mr Lawrence said.
At the time of the previous shooting police said it was an "indiscriminate" attack. The bikers, from Canada and France, were travelling in the inside lane towards Oxford when they were shot at from a car in the middle lane. A 31-year-old man was hit in the right leg and taken to hospital for treatment.
The Bulldog Bash attracts around 30,000 motorcyclists and music fans from across Europe. This year Status Quo headlined the event. The organiser, a 56-year-old Hells Angel calling himself Bilbo, told reporters: "I knew the lad. He was 33 years old and was a Hells Angel ... you couldn't wish to meet a better person."
Bilbo, a member of the Wessex Hells Angels chapter for 30 years, refused to speculate on the cause of the killing. "It's dangerous to guess why [this happened]," he said.
"This year was a massive event and it went off virtually trouble-free. We had an amazing weekend and then this happened and it has totally shaken everybody. It's a massive loss to the biker community as a whole."
Bullets are dangerous. This may seem like stating the obvious. Of course bullets fired into a body at high velocity are dangerous. But, it turns out that there are other ways that bullets can cause harm, through lead poisoning.
In shootings, there are more immediate concerns than the toxic effects of the bullet. That bullets contain lead is also no surprise but it is only recently that a study has looked into bullets as a possible cause of lead poisoning.
The chances of surviving being shot have improved remarkably in recent years thanks to advances in emergency medical treatment. Once the threat to life has passed, removing the bullet or fragments might cause further damage so in many cases things are best left as they are. In the United States there are annually estimated 115,000 firearms incidents with an approximate 70% chance of survival. There are likely to be thousands of people walking around with lead fragments from bullets inside them.
Lead is the most intensely studied environmental poison and with good reason. The element and its compounds are highly toxic. The metal has been known and used for thousands of years. The effects on human health have also been well-known, if not properly understood, since at least the 4th century BC. The Romans in particular had a great many uses for lead from pipes to a food additive.
The only natural sweetener available to the Romans was honey so they found a way to make an artificial sweetener. Lead pans were used to boil the fruit mash left over from crushing grapes for wine. The acid in the fruit mash corroded the pans to form lead acetate, known for centuries as sugar of lead because of its sweet taste. The resulting sweetened fruit mash, called ¡°sapa¡±, was then used to flavour wine.
Wealthy Romans may have been slowly poisoned by their wine consumption but this would have taken time and the symptoms may have been too subtle to notice. It would have been difficult to make the connection to sapa and lead. But evidence of lead¡¯s toxicity could be found elsewhere.
Roman prostitutes are said to have eaten spoonfuls of sapa as a means of contraception, it also caused abortions as well as giving the women desirable pale complexions. However, these affects may have been seen as a positive advantage rather than evidence of damage to the body. Still, more evidence was available from Hippocrates who described a case of terrible attacks of stomach cramps in a lead miner. All of these health problems were a direct result of high levels of lead in the body.
No one seems to have paid much heed to poor Roman health resulting from exposure to lead, and the metal, and many of its compounds, continued to be used extensively. From Renaissance times to the 19th century, faces were plastered with white lead make-up to give the appearance of a fashionable pale complexion. Queen Elizabeth I made the practice hugely popular but paid the price with the loss of her teeth and hair. The white cosmetic, called ceruse, corroded the skin, caused the shakes, and in the cases of Kitty Fisher and Maria Duchess of Coventry, it killed.
When the lethal effects of lead became apparent it was even used as a method of murder. In 1882 Louisa Taylor obtained sugar of lead from a doctor to treat a fictitious skin complaint. Instead, Taylor used the ¡°medicine¡± to slowly poison 82-year-old Mrs Tregillis whose teeth turned ¡°black as coal¡± and gums blue ? a classic symptom of heavy metal poisoning. Her vomit was black and burned her throat.
Tregillis¡¯s suffering was very prolonged, though it did mean she was able to testify against her murderer while still alive and lying in her death bed. She pointed to Taylor and stated she had seen her pour a white powder into her medicine. After Tregillis died, Taylor was convicted of murder and hanged at Maidstone prison.
Lead¡¯s devastating effects on the body are a result of interactions with enzymes. Any enzyme can be potentially affected but in particular lead disrupts the function of an enzyme (¥ä-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase) involved in the production of haem for haemoglobin in red blood cells. With less haemoglobin the blood is less red, resulting in a pale complexion. Also, the material normally being converted by the enzyme is now floating around in higher concentrations than normal. These haem precursors can weaken the walls of blood vessels in the brain causing fluid to accumulate. The results can be anything from headaches and sleeplessness to hallucinations, depression, fits and coma. Children are particularly susceptible to the effects of lead and exposure in infancy can result in permanent low IQ levels and behavioural problems due to damage to the brain.
The symptoms don¡¯t stop there either. Lead is also likely to damage nerves leading to numbness and general feelings of weakness. Lead harms reproduction, causing miscarriages and babies with low birth weight. It also affects the kidneys as the organ attempts to remove it from the blood. It is often kidney failure that kills in cases of severe lead poisoning.
The severity of the symptoms depends on the level of exposure. But, unlike other toxic substances that have a minimum threshold below which the body can manage without cause for concern, no safe level has been identified for lead.
As the damaging effects of lead have become undeniable, measures have been introduced to lessen our exposure to the element. We have made considerable progress since the days of ceruse make-up and lead-tainted sapa added to wine. Lead paints are no longer on sale and lead compounds are not added to petrol. Although lead can never be completely eradicated from our lives it is slowly being removed wherever possible. Elevated levels of lead in your environment should be a genuine cause for concern as the people of Flint Michigan well know.
Where does this leave our survivors of firearms incidents with lead still within their body? Although fewer than 100 cases of lead poisoning from bullet fragments have been reported, cases are likely to be underreported. Symptoms can be mild and non-specific. Unless a patient is potentially exposed to lead through their occupation, they are unlikely to have their blood lead levels tested. The suggestion is greater counselling for those living with bullet fragments stressing the importance of testing. Greater awareness of the potential problems may help diagnosis and therefore treatment. It might also prompt the question of retained bullet fragments when patients present elevated blood lead levels that can¡¯t otherwise be explained.
The family of a man shot dead by police on the M62 motorway have said they are ¡°shocked and distraught¡± because detectives believe he may have been carrying an illegal firearm.
Mohammed Yassar Yaqub, 28, was shot dead through his windscreen when armed police swooped on his white Audi sports car on a slip road of the busy motorway in Huddersfield on Monday night.
As the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) launched an investigation into the shooting, friends paid tribute to the young father they described as ¡°no angel¡±. His family¡¯s lawyer released a statement saying: ¡°Mr Yaqub¡¯s family are in shock and are distraught. They would ask the media to respect their privacy at this difficult time.
¡°The family are fully aware that the incident that led to the death of Mr Yaqub is currently being investigated by the IPCC and they do not wish to make any further comment at this stage.¡±
Police said the incident was ¡°related to information received about criminal possession of a firearm¡± and was not terror related. There were five arrests ? three at the scene and two in a simultaneous ¡°related stop¡± of another vehicle in Bradford, police said.
IPCC investigators said ¡°what appears to be a non-police issue firearm¡± was found in Yaqub¡¯s vehicle after he was shot. A postmortem examination is due to take place on Wednesday and the coroner has been informed, the watchdog said.
IPCC commissioner Derrick Campbell added: ¡°My thoughts are with Mr Yaqub¡¯s family and all those affected at this difficult time. Though in its early stages, this investigation is making good progress but will be complex. We will be working hard to establish exactly what happened and would ask for patience while our investigation continues.¡±
The shooting sparked protests by a group of demonstrators on Tuesday night, closing off a busy road in Bradford.
Police vans were called when protesters, many wearing scarves or balaclavas to hide their faces, hurled abuse at officers. One demonstrator said: ¡°We are here to let people know what goes on and to show we are upset about yesterday¡¯s killing by the police.¡±A few missiles were thrown at the dozen or so police vehicles that had blocked the roads around Leeds Road. Officers in riot gear were called as the protest moved towards Bradford city centre.
A spokesman for West Yorkshire police said the protest began to
 disperse at about 10.30pm, adding that there was ¡°minimal disorder¡± and no arrests.
The force added in a statement: ¡°Police empathise with the heightened tensions and engaged with protesters to appeal for calm. They are continuing working with members of the community, partners and local officers to maintain community cohesion and police relations.¡±
The shooting follows a recent surge in gun crime in West Yorkshire, including an incident on Christmas Day when a police officer was fired upon while taking a witness statement outside a nightclub in Bradford. The officer was not injured in the incident, which is not believed to be connected to the shooting of Yaqub.
Witnesses described an ¡°absolute hive of police activity¡± as armed officers swooped on the white Audi near junction 24 of the motorway at about 6pm on Monday, boxing in Yaqub¡¯s vehicle before firing at least three shots through his windscreen.
The police investigation continued on Tuesday as armed officers searched a number of properties across Bradford and Huddersfield, including Yaqub¡¯s family home where about 20 grieving relatives and friends had gathered to pay their respects.
At least five police vehicles arrived in the surrounding streets, including a dog van, and officers with guns were positioned at the front and back of the house before leaving about 30 minutes later.
The force said it was cooperating with an IPPC investigation into the shooting.
Two neighbours said Yaqub¡¯s house had been shot at in a drive-by incident last year. A family friend said he had been targeted two or three years ago with shotgun pellets.
¡°It¡¯s a bit of a shock, really,¡± said Melanie Heyer, who said she had CCTV installed outside her front door after the incident. ¡°Two men with shotguns came to his house to try to shoot him last year. It was after school and there was kids everywhere.¡±
Another neighbour, who declined to be named for fear of reprisals, said there had been a ¡°load of police¡± on the street after the alleged shooting last year. ¡°It¡¯s all drugs related,¡± he said. ¡°It¡¯s getting commoner and commoner unfortunately.¡±
Yaqub, who was regularly seen with high-performance sports cars outside his family home, was acquitted seven years ago of attempted murder in the Huddersfield suburb of Birkby. Aged 21 at the time, he was accused of being one of the gunmen in a drive-by shooting in September 2009. The case against him at Bradford crown court was dropped in May 2010 due to a lack of evidence.
Friends paid tribute to the father of two on social media on Tuesday. Saima Khan said: ¡°So sad, my heart goes out to his parents.¡± Brigid Harbour said: ¡°Very sad for his family.¡± Another friend wrote: ¡°You were no angel but you were still one of the good guys and did not deserve this.¡±
Sam King posted on Facebook: ¡°May Allah grant him the highest rank in Jannat-Al Firdous, Ameen Mohammed Yassar Yaqub, 27, from Huddersfield was killed by the police yesterday, whatever the reason, this was wrong to do, and didn¡¯t deserve, leaves behind his family and friends. Sad news.¡±
Pictures from the scene of the shooting appeared to show a silver Audi that had been boxed in by a silver Mercedes E-class on the junction 24 slip road. The Audi appeared to have three distinct gunshot marks on the driver¡¯s side of the windscreen.
Gemma Wilson, a Conservative councillor who was in the area at the time, said five or six police cars appeared to be acting as a barricade on Ainley Top roundabout, off the M62.
¡°I was coming back at 6.15pm from the cinema with the kids and you could hear the police cars¡¯ sirens as you approached,¡± she said. ¡°The police cars on the roundabout seemed to be being used as a barricade but I¡¯m not sure ¡¦ There seemed to be some other unmarked cars as well, parked up, but I¡¯m not sure whether they were involved in the operation or not. It was an absolute hive of police activity.¡±
People had initially believed the incident was a lorry or bus crash, Wilson said, but she added: ¡°It didn¡¯t look like a normal car crash. We just had a gut feeling that something was wrong.
¡°An hour later I walked to the supermarket and the traffic was absolutely awful, you could see a sea of blue flashing lights. The traffic this morning is getting quite bad on the first working day after Christmas as well, so it¡¯s going to hit the area quite badly.¡±
Shahnaz Malik, 54, a foster carer whose house overlooks the scene, said she was ¡°absolutely petrified, terrified¡± because the incident had taken place so close to her home.
¡°It was like time stood still, everyone was just stood in shock. The police and the cars had come to an absolute stop,¡± she said. ¡°Police were looking into the car and then the ambulance arrived in a matter of minutes. I didn¡¯t hear the gunshots. It looks like there¡¯s some things dragged out of the car, like a bag that¡¯s been emptied.¡±
She added: ¡°It¡¯s a little village and a very tightknit community, but we haven¡¯t had a chance to speak about it yet.¡±
Rahul Tandon, from Halifax, told BBC Radio Leeds he was stopped by police on the exit slip road of junction 24. ¡°As we pulled off the motorway we could see a lot of police vehicles, a lot of flashing lights,¡± he said. ¡°We were basically the first car that was stopped by police and we just waited and waited.
¡°Over the next 10 to 15 minutes there was frenetic activity as more and more police vehicles arrived. At about 6.15pm to 6.20pm policemen were running up the slope to an ambulance and beckoning them to come quickly.¡±
The incident was the fifth fatal police shooting in England and Wales in the past nine months and the first involving West Yorkshire police since December 2010.
A spokesman for the force said on Monday night: ¡°Around 6pm this evening during a pre-planned policing operation near to the M62 in Huddersfield, a police firearm was discharged and a man has died.
¡°The slip roads east- and westbound at junction 24 of the M62 remain closed. An immediate referral has been made to the Independent Police Complaints Commission, who are in attendance in West Yorkshire, and West Yorkshire police are fully cooperating with their investigation.¡±
Mark Burns-Williamson, the West Yorkshire police and crime commissioner, said he was being kept updated by the chief constable.
¡°The Independent Police Complaints Commission have now launched an investigation following a mandatory referral to them and it would be inappropriate to comment further at this stage until more details are known,¡± he said.
Spoiler alert: this recap is for viewers of Deutschland 83 on Channel 4 and Walter Presents. Catch up on episode six here
Events came to a head with a double bill in which questions were answered, secrets exposed and nuclear armageddon averted. Over the course of two hours, the show¡¯s strengths (a steadily creeping unease, good twists and some solid acting, particularly from Jonas Nay as Martin) and weaknesses (odd plot holes, occasional unevenness of tone) were brought to the fore. Overall, I enjoyed Deutschland 83 for what it was ? a fast and furious adventure story about loss of innocence in an uneasy time, with some good jokes and a willingness to take risks. I do, however, understand those who felt that it lacked depth, and would add that The Americans covers similar ground in a more complex way.
That said, the two final episodes were the strongest of the season, and I particularly enjoyed the bittersweet climax, which left Martin back East facing a compromised future with the manipulative Annett, even as the Edel family fell apart horribly. It was clearly written in the hope of a second season (a wish that is yet to be granted), and there will be viewers who were left frustrated by the lack of closure in the final minutes, although I rather liked the hints of yet more terrible things to come. It had a gloomy charm.
Poor Martin got the biggest wake-up call of his life as he realised that Able Archer was just a training exercise, but that the East¡¯s refusal to believe this was likely to topple the situation into all-out war. Let down by everyone from Lenora to Tobias, he finally did the only thing he could and told General Edel the truth in an awful, beautifully acted scene. You could see the joy draining from Edel¡¯s eyes as he realised that his substitute son was as flawed as the real one, and his rejection of Martin¡¯s story was horribly believable. It wasn¡¯t a good couple of hours for anyone in the Edel family (except possibly Ursula, who left the family home to live with her sister Renate. May they spend the rest of their lives swilling champagne and plotting further revenge against the fish population). Yvonne started the episode enjoying life on the road and ended it with her certainties stripped away ? the scene in which she said goodbye to Martin was quietly heartbreaking, thanks to the slow-dawning revelation about how much she had been used.
Still, she had it easy next to the male members of the Edel family. Alex freed himself from military tyranny to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the peace protesters, only to be dumped by Tobias and told to get an Aids test. As if one moment of disillusionment wasn¡¯t bad enough, he then had to sit through an interview with the military police who, after listening to his heartbreaking description of Martin ? ¡°He¡¯s a natural-born soldier like my father. He¡¯s everything I¡¯m not: loyal, understanding, honest¡± ? shattered his illusions and left him weeping. We last saw him entering the Edel home having just had the test, result unknown.
As for General Edel, he lost everything: his wife, his standing in the military, his relationship with his children, his second son, Stamm, who was never more than a dream. While the show left it vague about which of the Edel men ended up blowing their brains out (a decision I found rather manipulative), I incline towards it being the general. There was such a sense of terrible loneliness emanating from him in those final scenes ? plus, Alex had only just entered the house, which makes me feel that we hear the shot from his point of view.
There were big revelations in the East as well, not least that Lenora had a secret lover from Mozambique and skipped the country to be with him. Lenora is such a survivor; of course she had a contingency plan. The final episode really belonged to Ingrid, however, as she confirmed what we¡¯ve all suspected ? Walter Schweppenstette is Martin¡¯s father ? then promptly secured Thomas¡¯s release and exile to the West. Her showdown with Annett was glorious ? ¡°You think I didn¡¯t know [about the books]?¡±; ¡°Did you want Thomas to rot in prison for the rest of his life ¡¦ or maybe you wanted to protect yourself from your feelings for him?¡±; ¡°Walter would never have arrested me and he would have made sure no one else did either¡± ? as was the steel she showed in confronting Schweppenstette.
As for Annett, I almost felt sorry for her. Her setting up of Thomas was terrible, and she was lucky Ingrid could pull strings on his behalf ? but in the end she was more pitiable than evil; a lost, naive girl caught up in a game she didn¡¯t really seem to understand. ¡°You can move around, but you still have to deal with yourself.¡± Indeed.
At the same time, I found the suggestion that Martin and Annett will somehow muddle through interesting, given that he tied her to a chair and she kidnapped his western girlfriend. It¡¯s possible that he won¡¯t stay with her, but I felt the show strongly implied that he would ? if only for their unborn child. It made for a grim ending for our once wide-eyed hero.
Things weren¡¯t looking much better for Schweppenstette, whose machinations were finally revealed, thanks to Martin and ? more surprisingly ? the suddenly alert Fuchs, who tracked down the doctored Nato report and realised just how many lies were being told. By the end, Schweppenstette almost looked chagrined, although I suspect he survived to weasel through another day.
Poor old Karl Kramer ? you served your country, but were forgotten within six weeks.
I thought the sense of panic was very well done here; as I¡¯ve mentioned before, it¡¯s hard to remember just how paranoid this era was. Both episodes perfectly captured the rising tension and sense that anything could happen.
As a fan of an awkward dinner scene, I loved Ingrid, Schweppenstette and Annett¡¯s Terrible Meal of Hidden Secrets and Outright Lies.
I haven¡¯t celebrated the show¡¯s fashion enough over the past seven weeks, so I¡¯d like to raise a belated cheer for Lenora¡¯s entire wardrobe, especially the red-and-black shirt she wore while talking to Martin on the phone.
In all honesty, Fuchs should have started doubting Schweppenstette the moment he unveiled his war wall. I¡¯ve watched Homeland, I know that a big wall of paranoia never ends well.
I¡¯m glad Thomas made it to the West, although I doubt his future was that rosy, given that he was met by Tobias as he walked to ¡°freedom¡±.
Talking of Tobias, did he genuinely care for Felix? That tender parting seemed as though he might, but he also had to go East without anyone tagging along, so ... Ah, Tobias, a mystery to the end.
Not sure that Martin really would have got away with that car-boot escape, but I like him so I went with it.
If I had a band, it would be called The Library of Forbidden Books.
Finally, nothing in the entire seven weeks of the show was better than Schweppenstette¡¯s attempt at dancing. The second-best dance scene of the year ? after this one from Ex Machina, of course.
Tempted as I was by Under Pressure, which played us out, I¡¯m giving this week to Billy Idol¡¯s White Wedding used to great effect in episode seven as Martin drove through the night from his demons.
Quote of the week
¡°They¡¯re not crazy, they¡¯re scrupulous. What¡¯s up on this wall is totally insane¡± ? finally someone tells Schweppenstette the truth.
So what did you think? Did it work for you or were the flaws too great? What about the ending ? bittersweet and downbeat, or an annoying amount of loose ends? Would you tune in if there were a second series? As ever, all speculation is welcome below ¡¦
Cleveland police have released a video showing the moment that officers shot a 12-year-old boy in a park on Sunday. Tamir Rice can be seen playing in the snow with a pellet gun before sitting at a bench for three minutes. As the police drive up he can be seen standing up and moving the gun at his waist. Two officers get out with their guns drawn and the boy falls, disappearing behind the car. Rice died of his wounds the following dayWarning: this video contains images that some viewers may find distressing
Detectives who have been looking at a spate of murders linked to Yardie-style activity in London in the last six months have been briefed and are to decide whether the case needs to be investigated as part of a wider ongoing inquiry.
Two men on a motorbike pulled alongside Westwood's Range Rover as he drove through Kennington, south London, on Sunday evening, shortly after he performed at the Lambeth Country Festival in Brockwell Park, Vauxhall.
One of the men fired at the vehicle with an automatic weapon, possibly a 9mm handgun, hitting Westwood in the right arm and his assistant Ross Newman in the leg. Four other passengers, all members of Westwood's company Justice Productions, were injured by flying glass.
Yesterday Westwood, 30, had a minor operation at St Thomas's Hospital in Lambeth, south London, to clean the wound - the bullet went right through his arm.
In a statement via the BBC he said: "I thank God I'm alive and that everyone has survived. Everybody at the hospital has been great. I feel fine."
Newman also needed surgery. The hospital said both men were in a stable condition and it is possible Westwood will be allowed home later today. Police said yesterday they were keeping an "open mind" about the motive.
The case will be referred to officers who are running Operation Trident, an intelligence gathering initiative which is investigating links between 13 murders and more than 30 shooting incidents in north and south London since January.
The violence is thought to be have been sparked by a turf-war between rival gangs and has included shootings similar to the one on Sunday evening.
"The officers in Operation Trident have been informed as a matter of course," said a police spokesman. "All incidents of this nature would be reviewed by the team. It is too early to say whether this is linked to any other shootings.
"We are keeping an open mind on the motive, and have not ruled anything out."
The police will also consider whether the shooting was a case of mistaken identity.
Detectives are appealing for witnesses who saw a motorbike speeding along Kennington Park Road towards the Elephant and Castle area at 8.40pm on Sunday. The bike was weaving erratically and the men were wearing multicoloured crash helmets.
Others involved in the hip-hop scene said they were shocked to hear of the incident.
"Westwood is extremely well respected," said one. "He is controversial, but only because he champions the music he loves. He does not have the kind of enemies who would be prepared to shoot you. Nobody can think why this happened."
Westwood is a rarity in hip-hop and rap - a white DJ who has become a near legendary figure in a predominantly black music scene. He is regarded as the most influential figure in hip-hop in Europe.
That the Radio 1 DJ was wounded in a drive-by shooting immediately linked the attack to a series of gun attacks in the capital.
Westwood's high-profile rap career may also have been a factor in the incident.
Rap lyrics sometimes contain violent and highly macho imagery, and the genre has had its image severely tainted in America after a series of drive-by shootings which have claimed the lives of some of its brightest stars.
Feuds within the American rap world are thought to be at the core of attacks which claimed the lives of rap stars Tupac Shakur and Biggie Smalls - also known as the Notorious BIG.
The BBC said Westwood was performing an off-air show at the festival and was heading towards another venue.
"We're obviously working with the police to try and find out what happened. We are all absolutely horrified.
"We are not aware that he has been threatened before this incident. Security has been tightened at the BBC after the murder of Jill Dando."
Laura Blumenfeld tells us almost straight away that she grew up in the midst of a kind of fairytale. 'I was born to American parents who believed the world was good, who raised us in exquisite illusion,' she writes, and the admission is worth keeping in mind through the pages that follow. The sense of bewilderment and anger that informs her strange story is, at first sight, a response to an act of terrorist violence committed against her father, but by the final chapters, it is her own pleasantly deluded childhood beliefs that have been called into question, as much as the tit-for-tat outrages of the Middle East.
Blumenfeld is a journalist on the Washington Post who moved to Jerusalem with her new husband, partly to try to understand, if not to avenge, the actions of a young Palestinian who had taken a pot shot at her father as he walked through the Old City 12 years previously.
By good fortune her father, a New York rabbi on holiday, was not badly hurt, but the frightening incident festered in his daughter's mind and became emblematic of her need to find out more about the passionate and destructive instincts that frequently steer the planet towards disaster. Significantly, the shooting took place around the time that her mother had left the family home after 25 years of marriage and, in Blumenfeld's eyes, this domestic injury to her father was just as hard to come to terms with. 'The bullet grazed my father's head, my mother pierced his heart,' she writes with a tragedian's flourish.
In the course of her courageous investigations, Blumenfeld travels to the West Bank and meets the family of the would-be assassin, Omar Khatib. After a series of minor subterfuges, she even manages to write to the criminal himself in prison to ask him why he chose to hurt her father. It is surely not too New York-psychobabble to wonder if it wouldn't have been easier to simply pick up the phone to her mother and ask the same question.
Given that the author pointedly tells us she was born to 'American parents' it is tempting, too, to see Blumenfeld's uncomprehending reaction to the revenge cycle in the Middle East as a little slice of contemporary American pie. Her shock is like a microcosm of the stunned response to the hatred expressed on 11 September.
While Blumenfeld's personal mission is always in danger of sounding solipsistic, and even glib, her earnest research into the nature of violent reprisal is laudable. She speaks to former Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu about the death of his brother in the Entebbe airport raid of 1976 and she travels to Albania and Sicily to talk about the meaning of revenge. At one point the Grand Ayatollah of Iran advises her that the attempt on her father's life means she is due a ninth part of a camel in compensation.
By the end of the story, there has been confrontation and some kind of reconciliation in a dramatic courtroom scene where Khatib appeals against the length of his sentence. But Blumenfeld's real point, one hopes, is that what happens in conflict zones is always personal as well as political. And she is right to suggest this is a way to call a halt to the killing.
The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and clarifications column, Monday March 3 2008
In the report below (regarding new interpretations of forensic evidence relating to the assassination of Robert Kennedy) we stated that he was hit by four shots. However, only three bullets entered his body; the fourth was lodged in a shoulder pad. One of the pistols referred to was a Harrington & Richardson and not, as we had it, a Harrison & Richardson. This has been corrected.
The official record states that senator Robert F Kennedy, like his brother before him, was killed by a crazed lone gunman. But the assassination of a man who seemed to embody so much hope for a bitterly divided country embroiled in an unpopular war still troubles this nation.
Little about the official explanation of the events at the Ambassador Hotel on June 5 1968 makes sense. Now a new forensic analysis of the only audio recording of the fatal shots has given new weight to a controversial theory that there were in fact two shooters, and that the man convicted of Kennedy's killing ? Sirhan Sirhan - did not fire the fatal shots.
Following his victory speech to supporters after clinching a tight democratic primary victory in California, Kennedy left the podium in the Embassy ballroom to address a press conference.
But the shortcut he and his entourage took through the hotel's pantry quickly descended into bloody mayhem. As Kennedy turned from shaking hands with two of the kitchen staff, a gunman stepped forward and began firing. Kennedy was hit by four shots including one which lodged in the vertebrae in his neck and another which entered his brain from below his right ear. He died in hospital the following day. Five other people were injured but survived.
Sirhan - a Palestinian refugee who said he wanted to "sacrifice" Kennedy "for the cause of the poor exploited people" - was quickly apprehended. He was eventually sentenced to life imprisonment.
"Sirhan was apprehended at the scene with literally a smoking gun," said acoustic forensic expert Philip Van Praag of PVP Designs, who has carried out the new analysis. "At the beginning many people looked upon this as an open-and-shut case. It was one man, Sirhan Sirhan, who was observed by a number of people, who aimed and fired a gun in the direction of Kennedy's entourage."
But the lone gunman explanation has always looked shaky. The autopsy of Kennedy's body suggested that all four shots that hit him came from behind, and powder marks on his skin showed they must have been from close range.
But Sirhan was in front of Kennedy when he fired, and after shooting two shots was overcome by hotel staff, who pinned him to a table. Also, Sirhan fired eight shots in total, yet 14 were found lodged around the room and in the victims.
"There is no doubt in our minds that no fewer than 14 shots were fired in the pantry on that evening and that Sirhan did not in fact kill Senator Kennedy," said Robert Joling, a forensic scientist who has been involved with the Kennedy case for nearly 40 years. He and Van Praag have published a book on the killing this week entitled "An Open and Shut Case".
The inconsistencies in the case have bred numerous conspiracy theories, including the involvement of the CIA and the idea that Sirhan - who claims not to remember the shooting and pleaded insanity at his trial - was a "Manchurian Candidate" assassin who was hypnotically programmed to kill the senator.
Now Van Praag has added new weight to the 'two shooters' theory. He reanalysed the only audio recording of the shooting, which was made by an independent journalist, Stanislaw Pruszynski. "At the time Pruszynski was not even aware that his recorder was still on," said Van Praag.
The recording quality is poor, but it is possible to make out 13 shots over the course of just over 5 seconds, before what Van Praag describes as "blood-curdling screams" obscure the sound. That is more than the eight rounds that Sirhan's cheap Iver Johnson Cadet 55 revolver carried.
Also, there are two pairs of double shots that occurred so close together it is inconceivable that Sirhan could have fired them all. The third and fourth shots and the seventh and eighth were separated by 122 and 149 milliseconds respectively. In tests, a trained firearms expert firing under ideal conditions could only manage 366 milliseconds between shots using the same weapon. And he was not being pinned to a table at the time.
Lastly, five of the shots - 3, 5, 8, 10 and 12 in the sequence - were found to have odd acoustic characteristics when specific frequencies were analysed separately. Van Praag thinks this is because they came from a different gun pointing away from Pruszynski's microphone.
To recreate this he recorded the sounds made by firing the Iver Johnson and another revolver, a Harrington and Richardson 922. At least one member of Kennedy's entourage was carrying this weapon when the killing happened. In the acoustic tests it produced the same frequency anomalies Van Praag had seen in the original recording but only when fired away from the microphone.
He presented his results on Thursday at the American Academy of Forensic Sciences annual meeting in Washington DC.
Paul Schrade, a close associate of Kennedy's who was director of the United Auto Workers union, was at the senator's side in the pantry and was shot in the head. He told the meeting that America lost an outstanding leader and potentially great president that day.
"I think we were in a position of really changing this country," he said. "What we lost was a real hope and possibility of having a better country and having better relations around the world."
He wants to see the case reopened and properly investigated. "We're going to go ahead and do our best to find out who the second gunman was and that's going to take a lot of work," he said.
Van Praag also wants the case reexamined. "We would hope that the evidence that we have uncovered ... would make a strong enough case to get serious consideration once again by the authorities," he said.
Police in North Carolina say one of the most celebrated names in X Games, Dave Mirra, has died in North Carolina at the age of 41.
Greenville police confirmed on Thursday night that Mirra¡¯s body had been found earlier in the day. Authorities responded to reports of an apparent suicide and discovered Mirra¡¯s body in a truck.
¡°We mourn the loss today of a great friend and wonderful human being who touched the lives of so many around the world with his gift. He called Greenville, North Carolina home and was as humble a guy talking with kids on a street corner about bikes as he was in his element on the world stage. A young life with so much to offer was taken too soon,¡± said the Greenville mayor, Allen Thomas.
Mirra was a brilliant BMX rider and won 14 gold medals at X Games, despite the fact that his career was nearly ended in 1993 after he was hit by a drunk driver. But Mirra recovered and he won X Games honors at an astonishing rate between 1995 and 2008, his record of 24 medals over a career was only broken in 2013 by Bob Burnquist.
He was also a rally driver and competed in ironman and triathlons. ¡°Ironman competitions are an entirely different ballgame. The level of competition is much higher, and there are way more athletes,¡± Mirra told Sports Illustrated.Mirra was married with two daughters.
ESPN, the broadcaster of X Games, released a statement paying tribute to Mirra. ¡°Dave Mirra, your courage, determination and natural skill in everything you pursued pushed the world of action sports to become a better place. From all of us at X Games and ESPN, we salute your contributions,¡± read the statement. ¡°Our sincere condolences go out to Dave¡¯s wife, Lauren, his daughters Mackenzie and Madison, the BMX community and friends of Dave Mirra.¡±
Mirra¡¯s friend and fellow BMX rider TJ Lavin expressed his sorrow at the news. ¡°I just wish he would have called me,¡± he told TMZ. ¡°I would have jumped on a plane in a second. There¡¯s always another way. If anyone needs help, just please get it. I feel sick about this.¡±
A published report says attorneys received $1.8m of a $5m settlement they negotiated with the city of Chicago on behalf of the family of Laquan McDonald, who was shot dead by a police officer.
The Chicago Sun-Times reported that to be higher than the 33% typically earned by lawyers in such cases.
Lawyers Jeffrey Neslund and Michael Robbins first demanded $16m from the city ? $1m for each shot fired by officer Jason Van Dyke into the 17-year-old.
Van Dyke has been charged with first-degree murder in the 2014 shooting, which was captured on video.
The settlement, approved by a judge, gives McDonald¡¯s mother and sister shares in monthly payments.
Robbins has defended his legal fees saying the amount ¡°isn¡¯t necessarily higher than usual¡±.
An 18-year-old man has died after being shot in Liverpool.Merseyside police said armed officers and the ambulance service were called after the teenager was found injured in Toxteth at about 8.30pm on Friday. He was later pronounced dead in hospital.
Ch Insp Keith McLachlan said the investigation was in its early stages and urged anyone who saw the incident or suspicious activity in the area to contact the police.¡°Any information may be vital to finding those responsible and bringing them to justice,¡± he said.¡°We are relentless in pursuing those who choose to bring firearms on to the streets of Merseyside. I am sure local people will be appalled that this has taken place in daylight hours.¡°Information from the community will always be acted on, so help us remove those responsible and their weapons from the streets.¡±
Police said the teenager¡¯s family had been informed and a postmortem examination was due to take place.
It was the third gun attack in Merseyside this week: in Fazakerley, a 43-year-old man was shot in the chest, and in Seaforth, a 27-year-old man was shot in the arms and leg. Both attacks happened within 25 minutes of each other on Thursday.
Anyone with information is asked to call police on 101 or Crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555111.
There is an opportunity - for the first time - for a global deal to control the movement of small arms, such as AK47s and anti-aircraft rocket launchers, as well as heavier weapons like battle tanks. Next year, the United Nations will examine the case for an arms trade treaty. And right now, we have the chance to shape that treaty, with the potential to reduce armed violence in Africa, in Asia and in every continent.
There can be few more urgent causes. Each year, about 45 million people are affected by war. Three hundred thousand people die looking down the barrel of a gun - and 200,000 of these are killed in countries ostensibly at peace. And arms proliferation thwarts peacekeeping efforts, can make humanitarian work almost impossible and tears both countries and families apart.
I have talked face to face with former child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of Congo, snatched from their school desks and forced to work as rebels, checking people are dead after skirmishes by hacking at their limbs with machetes. I have met women in Darfur who were raped by militias while their husbands were murdered. Hundreds of thousands of weapons have poured into these countries, in the process making the streets of neighbouring countries more dangerous. I refuse to accept that the world cannot take action to prevent these atrocities.
Despite the enormous progress we have seen over the past decade, it is clear that the UN and all its members must now do more. We must show that multilateral solutions work.
The problem is that the global arms trade is entirely free of international regulation. In a world in which the flow of consumer goods is governed by a plethora of international conventions and regulations, deadly weapons have an uncanny knack of slipping through the net. We rely on imperfect and contradictory national laws to regulate them, and these laws create loopholes that are expertly exploited by traffickers and brokers.
As a result, weapons flood into conflict zones where they are used to perpetrate misery and suffering. And this violence doesn't just stop development, it reverses it. Invariably, it is the poor who suffer most.
Even a couple of years ago, the idea of an arms trade treaty seemed wildly idealistic. But last December, 153 states voted at the UN in favour of conducting negotiations on just such a treaty. It would not ban conventional arms or stop countries defending themselves, but it would close loopholes, shut down unscrupulous arms dealers and keep weapons out of the hands of human rights abusers. We have to make this process work.
If we are to do so, all countries must have an equal say in shaping the treaty. We need a system created for all, by all. So far, 79 countries of the 192 in the UN have contributed to the process. Such an overwhelming response is unprecedented, but only 13 of these states are in Africa. There is still time for African countries to be involved and for African voices to be heard in this debate.
So today I am calling on leaders across the world to prioritise this treaty now. And I am calling on civil society and citizens in every country to support global action. We must not waste this opportunity. Millions of people whose lives are destroyed by armed violence every year are depending on us.
¡¤ Hilary Benn is secretary of state for international development.
SPECULATIVE SCIENCE
How does a gun silencer work? THE CRACK of a shot is made by the bullet breaking the sound barrier, and the rapid escape of the propelling gasses from the muzzle of the gun. A silencer is essentially a tube containing baffles and a barrel sized tube with holes. The gases that propel the bullet are diverted through these holes, and into the baffled area. The baffles slow down the gasses to the point where there exit does not make as much of a sound. By using sub-sonic ammunition, one can reduce the report due to the bullet breaking the sound barrier, and increase the effectiveness of the silencer. SOUND is essentially the way that we perceive rapid fluctuations in gas (air) pressure. When gas of high energy (pressure, velocity or temperature) comes into sudden contact with much lower energy gas (typically the ambient atmosphere), sound is generated. Its loudness depends upon the magnitude/speed of the transition. A gun silencer or for that matter, a car silencer works by dissipating the energy contained by the explosive/combustion gases, typically by a series of "baffles", prior to them being exhausted to atmosphere. Modern jet engines achieve their quieter performance by sheathing the main jet efflux in a "tube" of air of intermediate energy, thus reducing the magnitude of the single transition into steps. Incidentally, it is very difficult to properly silence automatic weapons because the force of the explosive gases is used to load the next bullet. The gases thus escape from the breech area rather than the barrel and may not be dissipated gradually. GUN SILENCERS, as Dr. Tuersley has generally stated, work by gradually reducing the pressure and velocity of the gas behind the bullet so that, by the time it hits the atmosphere, the distribution of vibration it conveys into it is extended and flattened. This is what produces, in an effective silencer, a soft low thump on discharge rather than the usual sharp, high crack. Typically, the bullet passes through a series of cylindrical chambers separated by baffles (in some successful examples made of oiled leather!) after leaving the barrel proper. The gas expands and circulates into each chamber at progressively decreasing pressure, venting finally after the bullet over a much longer period. However, the volume of gas a gunshot produces is usually very large if it is to produce the required power. The peak pressure in a rifle chamber may reach a couple of thousand atmospheres; that in a handgun perhaps half this figure because, although their bullet velocity is only of the order of one-third to half that of a medium-calibre rifle, they typically only have a fifth to a quarter of the barrel length to accelerate in. Therefore, to vent to atmosphere at or near comparable pressure, a silencer would need to have a volume of one or two thousand times that of the weapon's chamber. This would normally evaluate to several litres; and the usual type of silencer seen in thrillers is therefore obviously far too small. So the short answer to the question: "How do gun silencers work?" is "Usually not very well!" Pistol silencers of a few centimetres diameter and a few tens of centimeters in length are both very limited in effect and prone to being blown off the end of the gun unless excellently well- fitted. They usually affect accuracy severely and, especially in the case of small self-loaders, make the gun impossible to aim by obstructing the sight picture. There is some further loss of effect in self-loaders by venting from the breech whilst it is cycling, but the cylinder/barrel gap in revolvers is at least as much of a problem. For standard handguns of 7-8mm. calibre and above, silencing is ineffective and impractical; more so as calibre increases. Silencing a supersonic round such as 9mm. or .357" Magnum is further complicated by the sonic crack generated by the bullet's passage through the air; with this type of weapon silencing can at best only camouflage the direction and distance of the firer. Nevertheless, silencers of this size and type are very effective on smallbore rimfire rabbit rifles, and have also been used successfully on .22" pistols, in both cases owing to the small volume of gas evolved fron the propellant. They are usually known more accurately as "moderators" in these applications To silence larger weapons properly often requires that the silencer is embodied in the construction of the weapon. One successful example was the De Lisle carbine, first built as a clandestine weapon during WW2. This was a Lee-Enfield rifle rebarrelled from the powerful .303" rifle round to the much smaller-volume and lower-powered subsonic .45" automatic pistol cartridge. The silencer fully enclosed the barrel and projected beyond it. The barrel was vented into the surrounding silencer over about half its length by rows of holes progressively increasing in size toward the muzzle. The gun retained the original bolt action so that the breech remained shut until manually opened. Having used a more recent copy of this, it appears that the claim made at the time, that the fall of the firing-pin was the loudest noise of discharge, was an exaggeration. The thing sounded a little louder than a fairground airgun, and its velocity was 15% lower compared to the same round fired from a standard pistol. This would have limited its effective range to 30-50 metres or so.Details have begun to emerge of the terrifying experience of students and staff at the Umpqua community college, where 26-year-old Chris Harper Mercer shot and killed nine people and injured at least seven others.
Harper Mercer died in a shootout with police who responded to calls about an active shooter at 10.38am on Thursday.
Anastasia Boylan, 18, was in a class when Harper Mercer came in shooting, her father Stacey Boylan told CNN. He said his daughter, who was undergoing surgery for her injuries, survived by ¡°playing dead¡±.
¡°[Harper Mercer] came in and there was gunfire immediately and he scattered the room. From what I understood what she said was he shot the professor point blank, one shot killed him.
¡°Others had been injured and then this man had enough time ? I don¡¯t know how much time elapsed ? he was able to stand there and start asking people one by one what their religion was.
¡°¡®Are you a Christian?¡¯ he would ask them, and ¡®if you are a Christian then stand up¡¯ and they would stand up. He¡¯d say ¡®because you are a Christian you¡¯re going to see God in about one second¡¯ and then he shot and killed them. And he kept going down the line doing this to people.
¡°How much time do you need?
¡°She said he had a handgun. It wasn¡¯t a big rifle or an assault rifle. This was a single handgun and he had enough ammunition and enough time to drop the magazine out of it, put another one in and continue his thing. How does he have that much time at a facility? I don¡¯t understand that. How he could have that much time to kill that many people.¡±
Hannah Miles, a 19-year-old freshman, was in her writing class when her teacher got a call from security saying the school was in lockdown. She heard gunshots from a neighbouring classroom.
¡°There was a huge pop. It sounded like a ruler smacking against a chalkboard,¡± she told local news. ¡°Everyone jumped and we didn¡¯t know what was going on. Then there was another one.¡±
Miles said there were noises from the next room, ¡°people shuffling, kind of talking¡± and the teacher went to the door and knocked on it, asking if everything was OK in there. There were more shots.
¡°Then everything went quiet. The look on her face was horrifying, and she said we all needed to get out.¡±
Huddled together in the locked classroom, the students and teacher heard footsteps outside and a man¡¯s voice call out to them, ¡°Come on out, come on out,¡± Miles said. They remained quiet and did not open the door.
Police soon arrived, Miles said, and after students were convinced it was indeed officers, they opened the door.
¡°It was like a huge burden had been lifted,¡± she said. ¡°A huge sigh of relief that we were going to be OK.¡±
A 20-year-old student from New Zealand was among those who fled the shooter, according to the NZ Herald.
Jaylen Gerrand had been at the Umpqua community college for two weeks on a basketball scholarship. Gerrand spoke to his New Zealand based coach, Jeff Green, the Herald reported.
¡°He was running alongside a guy and the guy was shot dead ? the guy running next him,¡± Green told the Herald.
¡°He ran past three others that were shot dead, so it was horrifying, horrific.
¡°So he saw four people dead. He¡¯s totally distressed, totally distressed. He just wants to come home right now. It¡¯s a huge, huge tragedy.¡±
Kortney Moore, 18, said she was in a writing class when a shot came through the window and hit the teacher in the head.
The gunman then entered the Snyder Hall classroom and told people to get on the floor, she told the Roseburg News-Review newspaper. He told people to stand up and state their religion before opening fire.
Next door, students heard a loud thud and then a volley of gunfire, Brady Winder, 23, told the newspaper.
Students scrambled ¡°like ants, people screaming, ¡®Get out!¡¯¡± Winder said. He said one woman swam across a creek to get away.
The gunfire sparked panic as students ran for safety and police and ambulances rushed to the scene.
Lorie Andrews, who lives across the street from the campus, heard what sounded like fireworks and then saw police cruisers streaming in. She spoke with students as they left.
¡°One girl came out wrapped in a blanket with blood on her,¡± she said.
Some students were in tears. Police lined them up in a parking lot with their hands over their heads and searched them.
Her mother, Pauline Platt, who has two other young children, heard the shots, ran round the corner and found her daughter collapsed with a single bullet wound to her stomach. She died on the operating table at the Queen's Medical Centre in Nottingham.
Last night Nottinghamshire police said an arrest was made on Saturday. They refused to give any details, other than it was a Nottinghamshire person "helping with their inquiries", but officers said there might be revenge attacks.
Superintendent David Colbeck said they had received intelligence that there might be trouble at the fair, and measures had been put in place, but the information was not specific and the measures did not include additional patrols in St Ann's, where Danielle lived and was shot.
He added: "We still have a long long way to go. There is still a core of individuals who believe the only way they can build their business is by using firearms."
A 17-year-old local who did not want to be named said she saw the shooting. "I was in [a nearby] street, and I heard the gunshots. I ran up here. I saw the car - a gold Citroen with blacked-out windows.
"I reckoned it was case of mistaken identity, because they were with a group of boys. I reckon they were heading to get the boys but they shot the girl instead of the boys."
She said she had tried to help Danielle: "I caught her in the alleyway and tried to stop the wound from bleeding but she had internal bleeding."
Another girl added: "One of her friends saw a gun pointing out and shouted for everyone to get down but Danielle was too slow. She was dropping to the floor when she was hit in the chest and stomach. "But she wasn't the target - they were going for one of the lads with her. She was an innocent victim.
"All she was doing was hanging out with her friends, which has nothing to do with this. But, as sure as night follows day, there will be reprisals."
Two teenagers, Aleysha and Naomi Reid, said: "She did not deserve to be shot. She was a black beauty; an angel. How can anyone kill an innocent 14-year-old girl? The people who did this should be locked away for ever."
Yesterday red roses, lilies and gerberas lay piled on the pavement next to a blue and white teddy bear where Danielle Beccan was shot. A group of teenagers taped a tribute, in childish handwriting, to a lamp post. They paused for a moment, weeping and hugging each other.
"On the 9th of October every year we will sit down and celebrate the life of Danielle Becan," it reads. "Who was a friend to many - but enemy to some. Thirty minutes past the hour of 12, bullets were shot and her life was stole. The heartache and pain is unbearable. How many times must a bullet fly before they're forever banned."
Another card has a photocopied picture of Danielle with her hands on her hips and he message": "I love and miss you Dani RIP." Young people gathered in small groups weeping in disbelief as they examined the flowers.
Sue Fish, Assistant Chief Constable of Nottinghamshire, called it a truly wicked and callous crime and added: "We will do everything in our power to find the people responsible."
It is the latest in a series of gun-related incidents which have plagued Nottingham, which experts fear has become infested with "super thugs" who command minions to do their bidding while taking millions of pounds from narcotics.
Jamaican Yardies, many of whom repeatedly thwart deportation attempts, also have a strong foothold in the city's heroin and crack cocaine market.
Danielle's grandfather Alvin Beccan, 69, said: "She was just an easy going, nice girl. Her family are very cut up about it at the moment." Her uncle Devon visited the scene, placed a bunch of flowers and hugged two weeping women. As he drove past he said: "We are absolutely devastated. If anyone prints that it was drugs and gang warfare they will have to face the consequences."
John Bull, 61, who has lived in the area all his life, said there had been a rising tide of incidents involving drugs and guns. "It beggars belief that a 14-year-old can be shot - it is unbelievable. There are no words to describe the animals who did this. They should be caught."
Another teenager wept and said: "I didn't get on with her, but this should never have happened. She didn't deserve it."
Det Supt Colbeck said Danielle was not in a gang, but Goose Fair was traditionally a time of tension between rival groups. He said: "I am just horrified and really angry. She's 14 - she's just a child. She's just going home with her friends from a good night out at Goose Fair.
"She's not part of a gang who's been shot and killed. She's innocent, for God's sake. It could have been your daughter, your son. It could have been you, just walking home. These people are evil and they need to go to prison."
Nottinghamshire's chief constable, Steve Green, is a vociferous critic of liberal justice values who had described his force as being swamped by gun and drug crime. In July he opened a wider debate about the criminal justice system, saying that society's emphasis on tolerance and understanding was a "failed" social experiment. The evidence was on the streets, where youngsters behaved badly but knew how to play the system, he said.
The Rev Evelyn Hall, of Mount Olive Apostolic church, said she had visited the family to offer words of consolation and prayer. "There is so much shooting around here," she said. "I think it is only God that can help with the forces of darkness and evil which surround the area.
"I do not think the police can do anything to help. I don't know how the family will cope. I am a mother of 10 and I wouldn't want to give one of my children away."
The handwritten notice on the lamp post concluded: "RIP Danzi Bi love ya lots babes. I wish you were still here. Luv DD."
The assassins ambushed the king at nightfall and fired their shots as the royal¡¯s entourage passed in front of their lair.
As the shooters were 13 and 14 years old, and their weapon of choice an airsoft gun loaded with plastic pellets, the incident that took place in a suburb of Munich on 10 June is unlikely to have consequences as historic as the ambush of Archduke Franz Ferdinand.
But since their accidental target happened to be the King of Thailand ? whose colourful social life the country¡¯s military junta has been eager to cover up while it continues to mourn the passing of his father ? the teenagers¡¯ mischief may have amounted to a diplomatic incident.
According to German media reports of the incident, which emerged this week, the king and his bodyguards continued on their way after being shot at, but police were alerted to the incident an hour later ¡°via official channels¡±.
The Bavarian state prosecutor in Landshut is now investigating the 14-year-old for attempted criminal assault. The 13-year-old is below the age of criminal responsibility.Prosecutor Thomas Rauscher has played down the incident, telling Der Spiegel that no one was hurt during the toygun shootout, and the Thai royal was most likely not even hit as he passed through the city of Erding at the end of a bike tour.
A spokesperson for the state prosecutor later insisted the child was not being investigated just because the attempted assault was on a monarch.
King Maha Vajiralongkorn Bodindradebayavarangkun, who resides in a villa on Lake Starnberg in south-west Munich, has struggled to stay off the front pages since his father Bhumibol Adulyadej passed away last October.
German tabloid Bild has published photographs of the 64-year-old wearing a crop-top and low-slung jeans while shopping, as well as pictures of the king being served lunch by kneeling staff on a cycling tour in the Upper Bavarian countryside.
Local media have taken to likening Maha Vajiralongkorn, who has seven children from three marriages, to Ludwig II, the eccentric 19th-century ruler of Bavaria who built the fairytale castle of Neuschwanstein.
Thailand¡¯s strict lese-majeste laws forbid reports on the royal family¡¯s private life, and videos or articles reporting on the new king¡¯s luxury lifestyle have been blocked in the country. In May this year Thai authorities announced it would take legal action against Facebook over 131 posts it regarded as critical of the crown, but later appeared to back off its threat.
The late king Bhumibol Adulyadej¡¯s reign had given Thailand a degree of continuity over seven decades of political instability and after the May 2014 military coup, the palace was the only part of Thai society the military junta declined to claim control over.
However, the king¡¯s death and reports about the playboy-like behaviour of his successor now pose a threat to the current regime¡¯s legitimacy.
Maha Vajiralongkorn, who was educated at Millfield boarding school in Somerset and underwent military training in Australia, has for decades been a regular visitor to Munich, where he reportedly visits local clinics for regular medical check-ups.
The crown prince used to stay at Munich¡¯s luxury Kempinski hotel, in which Thailand¡¯s Crown Property Bureau used to own a majority share, until he bought a listed villa for a reported ¢æ10m (¡Ì8.8m) in the Tutzing municipality last July.
The new Thai king¡¯s wealth could become the source of further diplomatic headaches in the future. Since Maha Vajiralongkorn was a resident of Bavaria at the time of his father¡¯s death, he would be due to pay inheritance tax on the personal wealth passed down from Bhumibol Adulyadej.
Bavaria¡¯s finance ministry has declined to comment on the issue, citing tax secrecy.
A police officer and three other people were shot and killed when a domestic dispute at a bank escalated into shootings at three locations in northern Wisconsin on Wednesday, investigators said.
A suspect was taken in custody after the shootings, which happened at a bank, a law firm and an apartment complex. Officers, including a Swat team, had a standoff with the suspect for several hours at the apartment site before it ended in a volley of gunfire at about 5pm.
Authorities took no questions in a brief media conference late on Wednesday and gave no details on the four victims or the suspect. They said there was no remaining threat to the public. Jason Smith, a deputy administrator for the state Department of Justice¡¯s division of criminal investigation, said more than 100 officers were investigating and more information would be released on Thursday.
The violence unfolded in a cluster of small towns south of Wausau, about 90 miles (145km) west of Green Bay. The officer worked for Everest Metro, a small, 27-officer force that serves Schofield and Weston.
Everest Metro chief Wally Sparks offered his condolences to all the victims and their families and asked the public to ¡°please keep them in your prayers and be with our officers¡±.
The first shooting was reported shortly after midday at Marathon savings bank in Rothschild. Officers responding to a reported ¡°domestic situation¡± at the bank arrived to find two people had been shot. They said the suspect was gone when they arrived.
A second call came about 10 minutes later from the Tlusty, Kennedy and Dirks law firm in nearby Schofield. The third shooting happened at 1.30pm from an apartment complex in Weston.
A woman who lives in the complex said she looked out of her apartment window at the complex at about 1.15pm. to see a squad car approach, and a few seconds later heard a gunshot and saw the officer fall. Kelly Hanson, 21, said she saw other officers put the wounded policeman in an armored Swat vehicle and take him away.
¡°I thought, what is going on? I know what a gun sounds like, and thought ¡®This isn¡¯t good¡¯,¡± Hanson said. She said she stayed in her apartment until about 4.45pm when she heard a volley of about 10 shots. Authorities eventually let her leave her apartment. ¡°It¡¯s tragic that had to happen, but I think they did a good job out here today,¡± Hanson said.
Swat members entered the apartment building about 2.30pm, the Wausau Daily Herald reported. Nearby schools and a hospital went into lockdowns that were later lifted.
Susan Thompson, a resident of the building, told the newspaper she heard gunshots and someone scream. As she left her apartment, police called to her to get inside and lock her doors. Thompson, 21, said she had her two-year-old daughter in the apartment. Officers later came to her door and helped her and her daughter outside, she said.
Omar Sey, 31, who said he had just moved to the apartment complex, learned of the shooting after he arrived home to find dozens of squad cars outside. Sey, who said he had moved to Wisconsin from Gambia, said he didn¡¯t understand why such things happen in America.
¡°This is crazy,¡± he said. ¡°You have everything at your disposal. Why don¡¯t you make your life better instead of engaging in this.¡±
The Aurora shooting has re-lit the arguments over gun control in
the US.
How does the US really compare on firearms? The world¡¯s crime figures are collected by the UNODC through its annual crime survey. It has a special section of data on firearm homicides - and provides detailed information by size of population and compared to other crimes. It is not a perfect dataset - some key nations are missing from the data, including Russia, China and Afghanistan. But it does include the US, UK and many other developed nations.
The Small Arms Survey is also useful - although it is from 2007, it collates civilian gun ownership rates for 178 countries around the world, and has ¡®normalised¡¯ the data to include a rate per 100,000 population.
So, given those caveats, we can see which countries have the highest ownership rates for firearms - and which have the highest gun murder rates.
? The US has the highest gun ownership rate in the world - an average of 88 per 100 people. That puts it first in the world for gun ownership - and even the number two country, Yemen, has significantly fewer - 54.8 per 100 people
? But the US does not have the worst firearm murder rate - that prize belongs to Honduras, El Salvador and Jamaica. In fact, the US is number 28, with a rate of 2.97 per 100,000 people
? Puerto Rico tops the world¡¯s table for firearms murders as a percentage of all homicides - 94.8%. It¡¯s followed by Sierra Leone in Africa and Saint Kitts and Nevis in the Caribbean
The full data is below - what can you do with it?
A gunman opened fire at a Maryland office park on Wednesday morning, killing three co-workers and wounding two others, authorities and the business owner said.
A manhunt was underway for 37-year-old Radee Labeeb Prince, who was considered armed and dangerous.
Sheriff Jeffrey Gahler of Harford County said Prince shot his victims with a handgun and fled the Emmorton Business Park in Edgewood, which is about 25 miles (40 kilometers) north-east of Baltimore. The sheriff did not release a motive for the shooting.
The victims and the suspect worked for Advanced Granite Solutions, the owner of the home improvement company told The Associated Press. Prince has been an employee for four months, working as a machine operator, owner Barak Caba told AP in a brief telephone interview. Caba was shaken and would not provide additional details.
The wounded were in critical condition, according to a spokeswoman for the University of Maryland Medical Center¡¯s R Adams Cowley shock trauma center in Baltimore.
Maryland¡¯s governor, Larry Hogan, spoke during a break from a meeting of a state board, saying the survivors had gunshot wounds to the head.
He said authorities had helicopters in the air and police on the ground looking for Prince, who may be driving a black 2008 GMC Acadia with the Delaware license tag PC 064273.
¡°The killer remains on the loose,¡± Hogan said.
The FBI is assisting local authorities. Investigators were treating the shooting as a case of workplace violence and didn¡¯t see ties to terrorism, said Dave Fitz, a spokesman for the Baltimore FBI field office.
Nearby schools and businesses were locked down as a precaution.
The business park is just south of the Interstate 95 interchange with Maryland 24.
Yellow crime scene tape cordoned off Advanced Granite Solutions on Wednesday afternoon. Investigators, deputies and federal agents fanned out across the business park to investigate.
Across the road, several employees, some wearing lime green T-shirts with the Advanced Granite Solutions logo, embraced each other as they waited for news of their colleagues. The sheriff said the department had set up a receiving area for family members in a nearby hotel ballroom.
The sheriff said Prince had a criminal record, but he did not know the extent of it. According to online court records, Prince lived in Elkton, about 35 miles from the shooting scene as recently as last month.
The sheriff said authorities checked an Elkton home after the shooting, but Prince was not there.
Australian police have shot dead a gunman named as Yacqub Khayre in Melbourne who had been holding a woman hostage in an apartment block in the Brighton area of the city. Three officers were hurt in the standoff, police said, adding that a second man had earlier been found dead from a gunshot wound
America was stunned on Wednesday when a gunman opened fire on Republican politicians practising for a charity baseball game near Washington, wounding four people.
The first victim was Steve Scalise, third in line in the Republican leadership in the House of Representatives, who was shot in the hip and crawled across the field, leaving a trail of blood, witnesses said.
The suspect, widely identified as James Hodgkinson, 66, from Belleville, Illinois, and thought to have been armed with a rifle and a handgun, died of injuries sustained when police returned fire.
On Wednesday night, MedStar Washington Hospital, where the Louisiana congressman was listed as in ¡°critical condition¡±, said that ¡°the bullet travelled across his pelvis, fracturing bones, injuring internal organs, and causing severe bleeding¡±. The hospital also said that Scalise would ¡°need additional operations¡±.
Amid reports that the gunman had been politically motivated, Donald Trump led appeals for unity, stating that everyone can agree that we are ¡°blessed to be Americans¡± and that we are strongest when ¡°we work together for the common good¡±.
Republicans and Democrats called for bipartisan unity at a time of extraordinary polarisation in the US. Bernie Sanders said he had been informed that the suspect had apparently volunteered for his presidential campaign last year.
¡°I am sickened by this despicable act,¡± Sanders said on the Senate floor. ¡°Let me be as clear as I can be: violence of any kind is unacceptable in our society, and I condemn this action in the strongest possible terms.¡±
The shooting took place at about 7am at Eugene Simpson stadium park in an affluent, peaceful neighbourhood of Alexandria, Virginia, across the Potomac river from Washington DC.
Between 25 and 30 Republican members of the House and Senate had gathered for early morning practice, a day before the annual charity congressional baseball game between Republicans and Democrats.
Mo Brooks, a congressman from Alabama, told CNN: ¡°I was on deck, about to hit batting practice on the third-base side of home plate, and I heard a loud ¡®bam¡¯, and I look around and behind third base and the third base dugout, which is cinderblock, I see a rifle. And I see a little bit of a body and I then hear another ¡®blam¡¯ and I realise that there¡¯s an active shooter.¡±
Brooks heard a break in the gunfire, he recalled, and ran across the field to a dugout for better cover. He took off his belt and another congressman applied a tourniquet to stem the bleeding of a staff member wounded in the leg.
Eventually they got word that the gunman was down. ¡°We ran out to second base for Steve Scalise. He had crawled into the outfield, leaving a trail of blood. We started giving him some liquids. I put pressure on the wound in his hip. And Brad Wenstrup, a congressman from Ohio, Cincinnati, fortunately, is a physician. He started doing what you need to do to minimize the blood loss.¡±
He added: ¡°But for the Capitol police and the heroism they showed, it could very well have been a large-scale massacre. All we would have had would have been baseball bats versus a rifle. Those aren¡¯t good odds.¡±
Capitol police had only been present because Scalise, the Republican whip, was playing.
¡°Everyone on that field is a public servant,¡± Trump said in a measured televised statement. ¡°Our courageous police, our congressional aides, who work so tirelessly behind the scenes with enormous devotion, and our dedicated members of Congress who represent our people.
¡°Our children deserve to grow up in a nation of safety and peace, and that we are strongest when we are unified, and when we work together for the common good.¡±
The other individuals receiving medical treatment for gunshot wounds were named as congressional aide Zack Barth and lobbyist Matt Mika. Capitol police officers Krystal Griner and David Bailey were also injured. A joint FBI-ATF statement said one officer was hospitalised and in a stable condition, while the other had been released.
The congressional baseball game is a summer institution in Washington. Every year, staffers, reporters, lobbyists and interns spend a night combining American politics and America¡¯s pastime. The game pits Democrats versus Republicans in fierce but friendly competition played to benefit charity.
Police and the FBI said it was too early to determine a motive in the shooting or whether the attack was an attempted political assassination.
But Brooks, who was at the scene, indicated there might have been a political motive in the attack. He told the Fox Business Network: ¡°We reported to police that there was a gentleman that confronted us when we were going to our car, and he wanted to know whether it was Republicans or Democrats that were out there. We said it was Republicans and he kind of started walking to the field.¡±
Later, asked whether Hodgkinson fit the description of the man who approached him in the parking lot, the Republican congressman Ron DeSantis said: ¡°Both [Representative] Jeff Duncan and I believe that, yes, that is the individual who approached our car. This would have been five to ten minutes before the shots started.¡±
Members of the House appeared shellshocked on Capitol Hill, and held a joint prayer session. The House speaker, Paul Ryan, received a standing ovation after insisting: ¡°We are united. We are united in our shock, we are united in our anguish. An attack on one of us is an attack on all of us.¡±
On Wednesday night, Trump, along with his wife, Melania, visited the hospital where Scalise was being treated. The president and the first lady brought ¡°two big bouquets of white flowers¡± which were carried by aides. According to White House press secretary Sean Spicer, Trump ¡°spoke with Scalise¡¯s family, and sat by his bedside with Mrs. Trump.¡±
Afterwards, Trump tweeted: ¡°Just left hospital. Rep. Steve Scalise, one of the truly great people, is in very tough shape - but he is a real fighter. Pray for Steve!¡±
But the shooting was certain to raise again the issue of gun control in the US. Virginia governor Terry McAuliffe told reporters at the scene: ¡°This is not what today is about, but there are too many guns on the streets.¡±
The incident was the first shooting of a member of the US Congress since January 2011, when Democratic congresswoman Gabby Giffords was seriously injured in an assassination attempt at a gathering of her constituents in Tucson, Arizona.
Giffords tweeted on Wednesday: ¡°My heart is with my former colleagues, their families and staff, and the US Capitol police ? public servants and heroes today and every day.¡±
The Russian ambassador to Turkey has been shot dead by a police officer who shouted ¡°Don¡¯t forget Aleppo¡± as he pulled the trigger.
The chilling attack on Monday evening, which was captured on video, appeared to be a backlash against Russian military involvement in the Syrian civil war.
Andrei Karlov was attacked at the opening of an art exhibition in Ankara by a man believed to be an off-duty Turkish police officer. Karlov was several minutes into a speech when he was shot. Footage of the attack showed a man dressed in a suit and tie standing calmly behind the ambassador. He then pulled out a gun, shouted ¡°Allahu Akbar¡± and fired at least eight shots.
After firing at the ambassador, the man shouted in Turkish: ¡°Don¡¯t forget Aleppo. Don¡¯t forget Syria. Unless our towns are secure, you won¡¯t enjoy security. Only death can take me from here. Everyone who is involved in this suffering will pay a price.¡±
He also shouted in Arabic: ¡°We are the one who pledged allegiance to Muhammad, to wage jihad.¡±
The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, called the killing a ¡°provocation¡± aimed at sabotaging a rapprochement between Moscow and Ankara and attempts to resolve the conflict in Syria.
¡°The crime that was committed is without doubt a provocation aimed at disrupting the normalisation of Russian-Turkish relations and disrupting the peace process in Syria that is being actively advanced by Russia, Turkey and Iran,¡± he said in televised comments.
Putin said: ¡°There can be only one answer to this - stepping up the fight against terrorism, and the bandits will feel this.¡±
Putin said that Russian officials would be dispatched to Ankara to investigate the killing. ¡°We have to know who directed the hand of the killer,¡± he said.
His comments were echoed by Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov who said, following a phone call with his Turkish counterpart, Mevlut Cavusgolu, that those behind the shooting ¡°were seeking to derail the process of normalising Russia-Turkey ties primarily with a goal to prevent an efficient fight against terrorism in Syria.¡±
Lavrov will meet with the foreign ministers of Iran and Turkey later on Tuesday to discuss Syria.
The attacker was killed by Turkish special forces after they surrounded the gallery. Photographs from the aftermath appeared to show him lying dead on the floor. Three other people were wounded.
Local media outlets said security guards at the scene had told them that the killer showed a police ID to enter the gallery. The Turkish interior ministry named the attacker as Mevlut Mert Alt©¥ntas, an officer in Ankara¡¯s riot police squad, who was born in 1994 in Aydin and graduated from Izmir police academy.
The shooter¡¯s family home in the western province of Aydin was later searched and his mother, father and sister were detained, according to Turkey¡¯s state-run Anadolu news agency. . Alt©¥ntas¡¯s house in Ankara was raided and his roommate, also a police officer, was also taken into custody, it said.
¡°It has saddened us and our people. I offer my condolences to the Russian federation and the Russian people,¡± Suleyman Soylu, the Turkish interior minster, told reporters.
The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdo?an, called Putin on Monday evening to brief him on the attack.
The Russian president cancelled a planned trip to the theatre on Monday evening and called an urgent meeting with his foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, and the heads of the security services.
In a bizarre coincidence, Putin had planned to see the play Woe from Wit, written by the poet and diplomat Alexander Griboyedov, who was murdered by a mob when ambassador to Tehran in 1829.
Konstantin Kosachev, the head of the foreign relations committee in Russia¡¯s upper house of parliament, said: ¡°A tragedy of this scale has not happened since the time of Griboyedov. There have been attacks on our Russian and Soviet diplomats, but not something this dramatic.¡±
Kosachev said the repercussions of the killing on Russian-Turkish relations would depend on the details of the incident: ¡°It could have been a planned terrorist attack by extremists or it could be the work of a lone maniac. After we know, we¡¯ll be able to understand how this will affect Russian-Turkish relations.¡±
Kosachev¡¯s counterpart in the lower house, Alexey Pushkov, said Karlov¡¯s death was ¡°a result of political and media hysteria around Aleppo sown by the enemies of Russia¡±.
Turkish security officials and Erdo?an supporters have alleged that the gunman was linked to the exiled Turkish cleric Fethullah Gulen, whom they accuse of orchestrating a failed coup in July. A spokesman for Gulen described the accusation as ¡°laughable¡± and told Reuters that it was intended to cover up for lax security.
Later on Monday a gunman had attempted to enter the US embassy in Ankara and fired eight shots into the air. The man was overpowered by security guards and taken into custody by police. No one was hurt in the incident. The embassy said its missions in Ankara, Istanbul and the southern city of Adana would be ¡°closed for normal operations on Tuesday.¡±
Internationally, the killing of Karlov throws into doubt the ongoing evacuation deal for civilians in besieged east Aleppo, an agreement that was brokered by Turkey and Russia. A source with knowledge of the negotiations said Moscow was the main reason the deal did not fall apart over the weekend, despite the objections of Iranian and jihadi interlocutors.
The ambassador had been part of discussions with Turkey that led to an evacuation of east Aleppo getting under way late last week. Russia and Iran engineered the deal allowing civilians and rebel fighters in Aleppo to be evacuated, with Turkey acting as the brokers for the Syrian opposition in the discussion.
The attack comes the day before the Turkish foreign minister, Mevlut Cavu?o?lu, is due in Moscow for Syria talks with his Russian and Iranian counterparts. In the weeks running up to the fall of east Aleppo, the Russians, Turks and Iranians have increasingly been working together on Syria¡¯s future, to the exclusion of western powers, including the US, as well as the Gulf states, normally the sponsors of the Syrian opposition.
Putin has sought to capitalise on his new role as the lead power in Syria by proposing wider Syrian peace talks at a meeting in Astana, the capital of Kazakhstan, to be attended by Russia, Turkey and Iran on 27 December. Putin insisted his proposal would not conflict with the United Nations process in Geneva, but instead complement it. He wants to forge a Turkish, Iranian and Russian axis before Donald Trump¡¯s inauguration.
Many Syrian opposition figures fear they will be marginalised by the Putin initiative and his new triumvirate.
In his time as ambassador, Karlov presided over a rocky period in Russo-Turkish relations. When Turkey shot down a Russian fighter plane in November 2015, Moscow responded furiously, with Putin calling it ¡°a stab in the back by the accomplices of terrorists¡±.
Earlier this year, the pair reconciled, after Erdo?an wrote a letter of apology to Putin. The two leaders met at a summit in August amid a distinct thaw in relations and in what resembles a loose anti-western alliance.
Kosachev, who knew Karlov personally, said: ¡°The Turkish period in his career saw fantastic highs and lows. Everyone was hoping for another high.¡±
However, Russian actions in Syria have angered many Turks. In recent days, protests in Istanbul against Russian involvement in Syria and Aleppo, including a demonstration in front of the Russian consulate on the city¡¯s famed ?stiklal Avenue, have occurred on a regular basis. The protests have often had a significant Islamist contingent.
The assassination of the Russian ambassador, and the security lapse that allowed it to happen, will anger Putin but, in the medium term, it is possible that the two leaders could unite in an anti-terror alliance.
Fatih Oke, the former press attache of Turkey¡¯s embassy in Washington DC, tweeted: ¡°The bullet to Ambassador Karlov is not only aims him. It aims also Turkish Russian relation. We are praying for his good health and peace.¡±
Trump said in a statement: ¡°Today we offer our condolences to the family and loved ones of Russian Ambassador to Turkey Andrei Karlov, who was assassinated by a radical Islamic terrorist. The murder of an ambassador is a violation of all rules of civilized order and must be universally condemned.¡±
The US state department spokesman, John Kirby, said: ¡°We condemn this act of violence, whatever its source. Our thoughts and prayers are with him and his family.¡±
Karlov was a career diplomat who had previously served as ambassador to North Korea. The British ambassador to Turkey, Richard Moore, described him as a ¡°quietly spoken, hospitable professional¡±.
A teenager with German-Iranian citizenship has shot and killed nine people and wounded more than 15 at a shopping centre in Munich, in the third attack on civilians in Europe in eight days.
The 18-year-old man, who police believe acted alone, is understood to have lived in Munich for up to two years. He reportedly shouted ¡°I am German¡± during the prolonged attack on Friday evening, at the end of which he killed himself.
Germany¡¯s third largest city was forced into lockdown after the gunman opened fire on diners in a McDonald¡¯s restaurant before moving to a nearby shopping mall.
His motive was ¡°completely unclear¡±, said Munich police chief Hubertus Andrae. There was no immediate evidence of an Islamist or other terrorist motive.
Police raided the attacker¡¯s home in the early hours of Saturday, according to local media, but there were no details of his identity and he was not known to police.
A video posted on Twitter appeared to show the gunman in a furious exchange with a bystander as the attack was going on. In the footage, an unseen man can be heard shouting abuse at a man who appears to be the attacker pacing the top of a car park.
The unseen man can be heard telling other people with him that the man in the carpark has a gun, to which the man purported to be shooter responds: ¡°Fucking Turks!¡±
The unseen man shouts: ¡°He has loaded his gun. Get the cops here,¡± to which the other man shouts back: ¡°I am German.¡±
The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, was due to meet her chief of staff, interior minister, and a host of intelligence officials on Saturday morning to review the incident, which comes in the wake of the Bastille Day truck atrocity in Nice and an axe attack in southern Germany.
The French president, Francois Hollande said the Munich shooting was a ¡°disgusting terrorist attack¡± aimed at stirring up fear across Europe.
¡°The terrorist attack that struck Munich killing many people is a disgusting act that aims to foment fear in Germany after other European countries,¡± Hollande said.
¡°Germany will resist, it can count on France¡¯s friendship and cooperation,¡± he said, adding that he would speak to Merkel on Saturday morning.
US intelligence officials, speaking to Reuters on condition of anonymity, said initial reports from their German counterparts indicated no apparent link between the shooter and Islamic State or other militant groups.A 15-year-old girl was among the dead, and at least 16 people, including several children, were in hospital; three were in critical condition, Andrae said.
The gunman¡¯s body was found in a side street close to the mall. Police used a bomb disposal robot to search the site for explosives and booby traps, a local reporter said.
Police stopped trains, buses and trams, closed highways to private cars and ordered citizens to stay in their homes as they searched for suspected killers, as false rumours of fresh attacks sent panic through the city. The transport network was reopened following the all-clear.
The violence began just before 6pm, when the gunman, wearing a red backpack, opened fire at the McDonald¡¯s restaurant outside the Olympia shopping centre, near the site of the 1972 Olympic Games.
Video apparently shot outside the restaurant showed people fleeing in terror as a gunman with a pistol surveyed the street then calmly and indiscriminately opened fire as terrified bystanders raced for cover.
Emergency services raced to the site within minutes, but the gunman had apparently vanished. Police, fearing several attackers, searched the city, and a painstaking operation was launched to secure the shopping mall where dozens of shoppers and workers were still thought to be hiding.
For several hours, as rumours about the number and location of attackers swept through Munich, and officers went slowly from store to store, there was a desperate vigil for loved ones trapped inside.
¡°My 23-year-old daughter was part of a group that locked themselves inside H&M to protect themselves. I spoke to her over the phone and she was crying, but then her battery ran out,¡± said one father, weeping himself. He asked not to be named because of fears for his daughter.
Asked if this was a terror attack, a police spokesman said: ¡°If a man with a gun in a shopping centre opens fire and eight people are dead, we have to work on the assumption that this was not a normal crime and was a terrorist act.¡±
Merkel will convene a meeting of her security council, made up of senior ministers, on Saturday.
Cansu Muyan, who lives near the Olympia shopping centre, said she had been inside the mall with her sister when the attack began. ¡°I suddenly saw everyone running past. Then a shopkeeper told us all to leave as quickly as possible so we all started running as well,¡± she said.
Other witnesses reported hearing shots inside and outside the shopping mall, known locally as the OEZ. ¡°I was shopping when I heard three shots, then we ran out and about 40 seconds later we heard five shots from outside,¡± said Florian Horn, 33.
Staff in the mall were still in hiding more than an hour after the attack, an employee told Reuters by telephone. ¡°Many shots were fired. I can¡¯t say how many, but it¡¯s been a lot,¡± said the employee, who declined to be identified.
¡°All the people from outside came streaming into the store and I only saw one person on the ground who was so severely injured that he definitely didn¡¯t survive.¡±
¡°I ran out, I was so afraid, and then some people brought me and several others into their garden and apartment where we found safety,¡± said Jennifer Hartel, who had lost a shoe fleeing the attack and was still shaking three hours after the violence.
The horror of the bloodshed was followed by hours of uncertainty, as police raced to track down the gunman captured on video and up to two other reported attackers.
Police used a smartphone warning system, Katwarn, to urge people to stay at home, and used social media to ask locals and journalists not to share photos or video of police action to avoid helping any suspects on the run.
Residents responded by sharing pictures of pets and other cuddly animals under hashtags also used for news of the attack, and offering those stranded in the city a place to stay.
Hospitals were on emergency alert with staff, including doctors, surgeons and nurses, called in to await casualties.
Among the parts of the city to be evacuated was Munich central station. People were reported to have screamed and scrambled over railway platforms as the police ordered them to leave the station.
Germany¡¯s elite unit, its SAS equivalent GSG9, was flown in to support local security forces. Armed and masked but dressed otherwise unassumingly in T-shirts, trainers and shorts they were spotted in the vicinity of the local police who were on the scene within minutes of the first emergency call having been received.
It is the second attack in Bavaria in less than a week. Security forces have been on high alert after a teenage refugee attacked train passengers near the city of Wurzburg with an axe and a knife.
Islamic State claimed responsibility for the train attack, but authorities have said the attacker was likely to have acted alone.
Flags will fly at half mast on official buildings across Germany on Saturday. The country¡¯s interior minister, Thomas de Maiziere ? currently flying back from New York, will head straight to Munich on Saturday morning .
The UK¡¯s Foreign Office issued an alert warning British citizens in Munich to follow the instructions of the authorities. Speaking at the UN in New York, Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, said: ¡°Everybody is shocked and saddened by what has taken place. Our thoughts are very much with the victims, their families, with the people of Munich.¡±
¡°If, as seems very likely, this is another terrorist incident, then I think it proves once again that we have a global phenomenon now and a global sickness that we have to tackle both at source ? in the areas where the cancer is being incubated in the Middle East ? and also of course around the world.¡±
Country singer Mindy McCready died in Arkansas on Sunday, police said, after apparently shooting herself in the head.
The 37-year-old, who was noted for a turbulent personal life and her struggles with addiction, was found on the same porch where her boyfriend David Wilson is believed to have shot himself last month.
McCready found fame in 1996 with a series of hits from her first album, Ten Thousand Angels. Her best known track, Guys Do It All the Time, reached number one in the US country charts but she failed to maintain that level of success despite releasing another four albums over the following 14 years.
Cleburne County sheriff's office said deputies were dispatched to McCready's home at 3.31pm on Sunday after receiving a report of gunshots. Officers found McCready on the front porch of the house in Heber Springs, about 60 miles north of Little Rock. A police news release said she was pronounced dead at the scene, "from what appears to be a single self-inflicted gunshot wound".
It is thought that McCready had tried to kill herself at least three times since 2005. She was charged with obtaining the painkiller OxyContin fraudulently at a pharmacy in 2004, pleading guilty, and violated the terms of her probation from that offence a year later when she was arrested for drunk driving. McCready had been hospitalised in May 2010 after police responded to an overdose call at a Florida home owned by her mother.
"I call my life a beautiful mess and organised chaos," she told the Associated Press in 2010. "It's just always been like that. My entire life, things have been attracted to me, and vice versa, that turn into chaotic nightmares, or I create the chaos myself. I think that's really the life of a celebrity, of a big, huge, giant personality."
McCready had been ordered by a court to enter rehab earlier this month, Fox News reported, after her father told a judge she was abusing alcohol and was unable to take care of herself or her two sons. The boys were placed in foster care when McCready entered rehab, but it was not clear where they were at the time of her death.
The singer had previously appeared on Celebrity Rehab with Dr Drew in 2010, where she had discussed her problems with alcohol. McCready was back in the news in December 2011 when she took Zander, her elder son from a relationship with singer Billy McKnight, from the Florida home of his maternal grandmother ? the boy's legal guardian since 2007 ? without permission.
Police found McCready and the then 5-year-old child in the bedroom closet of an unoccupied summer home in Arkansas.
McCready had previously spoken of her pain after Wilson's death on 13 January, describing the record producer and father of her second child as her "soulmate".
"Those who knew and loved him will miss him; those who did not know David missed the opportunity to know a truly loving and gifted man," McCready said. The pair had been in a relationship for over two years, and had a nine-month old son, Zayne.
In a statement released after Wilson's death McCready said he had been a father figure to both her children.
"David was my soulmate; he was a caregiver and guiding hand to our sons, Zander and Zayne," she said. In an interview with NBC soon after his death she added: "I just keep telling myself that the more suffering that I go through, the greater character I'll have."
Following her death, a number of singers paid tributes to McCready. "I grew up listening to Mindy McCready ¡¦ so sad for her family tonight. Many prayers are going out to them," said Carrie Underwood, who won American Idol in 2005.Richard Marx remembered the singer's "poor children", while Natalie Maines of The Dixie Chicks wrote: "Too much tragedy to overcome. RIP Mindy McCready."
Details of the victims of Sunday night¡¯s mass shooting at the Route 91 Harvest festival in Las Vegas began to emerge on Tuesday, 24 hours after at least 58 people were killed and hundreds more injured in the most deadly mass shooting in modern United States history.
Cameron Robinson was a young city of Las Vegas employee, who was at the festival with his boyfriend, Bobby Eardley, when the popping sounds started.
Eardley recalled on Tuesday, ¡°And I just remember being really upset ? why would somebody set off firecrackers at a venue like this when shootings have happened?¡±
After a second round, Eardley decided it was time for them to move: ¡°I remember seeing people sitting on the ground and wondering why they were sitting because they were going to get trampled. And I realized they were bleeding.¡±
Eardley, 36, and Robinson, 28, had been together for four years after meeting on OkCupid; a year ago Robinson moved in with Eardley in St George, Utah. Robinson was a records specialist for the city.
¡°Long before he came to work for the city he gave me his resume,¡± recalled his boss, Las Vegas city attorney Brad Jerbic, ¡°and the first thing I remember noticing is that he got his bachelor¡¯s degree when he was 20 year old ? that immediately got my attention.¡±
When Jerbic hired him several years ago, his desk ended up being in the center of the office. ¡°It was a perfect metaphor,¡± Jerbic said. Robinson organized potlucks, brought food to the office, ran games at the Christmas party.
With Robinson, ¡°everything went up a notch. If it was fun it was more fun, if the records were being processed efficiently it was more efficiently.¡±
Robinson¡¯s sister, Meghan Ervin, wrote on Facebook: ¡°I was never suppose to say good bye to you little brother. You were suppose to take over the world ... I love you to the moon and back.¡±
What did Eardley love about him?
¡°He¡¯s my other half. I¡¯m the crazy, fly by the seat of your pants ? he¡¯s the straight laced and level headed one ... And so many other things. His quirky little smile, his big teeth, his crooked sunglasses ¡¦ so many things.¡±
A self-described ¡°stay-at-home wife and mother¡±, and hockey lover, Anderson had traveled to Las Vegas with her husband, and two daughters for the festival. In a Facebook post of a recent picture, daughter Stefanie reported ¡°This is one of the last family photos we will take¡¦ Sadly, my mom was one of the victims that did not make it.¡±
¡°You lit up her world,¡± one friend commented on the photo. ¡°There was no end to her love for you and your sister and dad. She was by far the best person I¡¯ve ever known.¡±
Berger was a father of three and a financial adviser in the Minneapolis Twin Cities. Friends said he had traveled to Vegas to celebrate his 44th birthday. ¡°He was charismatic, full of energy and breathed life into every room. He was always so positive,¡± his best friend Josh Decker told the Minneapolis Star Tribune. ¡°He was larger than life to me.¡±
Family told the Los Angeles Times that Berger was the primary caretaker of his children and spent his time off ferrying his children between school and sports practices, while also coaching youth basketball and football. ¡°He was a devoted father. You couldn¡¯t ask for a better father and a better man,¡± his father said.
Berger and Decker were together when the shooting started, the newspaper reported. After the two and everyone around them got on the ground Decker recalled looking around for his friend and seeing him lying motionless and bleeding. ¡°He was covered in his own blood,¡± he said.
Bowers, a 40-year-old mother of two older children, had adopted a two-year-old into her home just five months before being killed in Sunday¡¯s attack. ¡°She had a big heart. She was just a sweetheart. She would do anything for anybody,¡± her aunt told the Los Angeles Times. The Garden Grove, California, woman worked as a waitress at a local Mimi¡¯s Cafe restaurant.
¡°Her laugh and her smiles and [she was] always happy and spoke from the heart and you wanted the truth, you got it from Candace,¡± a longtime friend, Patty Tran, told ABC Los Angeles.
¡°Candice left this world doing what she loved, dancing to country music among loved ones,¡± her family wrote on a GoFundMe campaign they launched to support her children. ¡°She will be greatly missed by all who knew and loved her.¡±
Cohen, 57, was in Las Vegas to celebrate the birthday of her boyfriend, Derrick Taylor, who also died in the attack. The Carpinteria, California, resident was a mother to three boys. ¡°We will miss her big smile, positive attitude and the way she loved to live life large,¡± wrote her sister in law on a GoFundMe page.
Her friend Leana Orsua said she hoped Cohen didn¡¯t suffer. ¡°I know she was at a happy place,¡± she told NBC Bay Area. ¡°She was dancing and singing, and I think that¡¯s what she¡¯s doing in heaven.¡±
Davis, a 29-year-old pipe fitter from Riverside, California, was in Las Vegas for a ¡°guys¡¯ trip¡± with Thomas Day, who also died in the attack. Family friends described Day, 56, as something of a second father to Davis.
¡°If he knew [you], he loved you. That¡¯s just how he cared for people,¡± wrote his friend Katelyn Hood on a GoFundMe page set up to assist his family. ¡°Austin would refuse to let you be upset the slightest bit in his presence. You honestly couldn¡¯t be upset ... his smile was so contagious.¡±
Mark McManus, president of United Association, the union to which Davis belonged, said: ¡°We are now beyond stunned at the loss of one of our brothers.¡±
Fraser, who worked as a sales manager at a mortgage company in Orange County, California, was a father of four, aged four through 25.
¡°He was the life of the party,¡± said his widow, Stephanie, who was at the festival with him. ¡°He always had a smile on his face. He loved to hug everybody, get into everybody¡¯s bubble,¡± she told Time magazine.
¡°¡®Here¡¯s the deal¡¯... If you knew Brian, you have heard that come from his mouth numerous times,¡± family wrote on a GoFundMe page set up earlier this week. ¡°He had a way of saying what needed to be said in just enough words.¡±
Galvan, a mother of three young children, was in Las Vegas attending the country music festival with her husband and a group of friends. ¡°Her days started and ended with doing everything in her power to be a wonderful mother,¡± Galvan¡¯s sister wrote on a GoFundMe page.
After being struck by the gunfire, Galvan died in the arms of her husband, Justin. According to the Las Vegas Review Journal, the two met when they were students at Simi Valley high school, though they didn¡¯t get together until later, when Justin Galvan was in the US Marine Corps.
The couple married in Jamaica in 2011, and were just a couple of weeks away from their sixth wedding anniversary.
Etcheber was struck and killed while her husband, off-duty San Francisco police officer Vinnie Etcheber, tried to help usher others to safety.
¡°He stood back, he stood back to help those victims that were shot and he stuck with them, he stuck with them all the way to the hospital,¡± officer Etcheber¡¯s brother Al told ABC San Francisco. When he returned to find his wife, everything was blocked off and she was unaccounted for.
¡°She leaves behind two adoring beautiful children and an amazing husband. Thank you to everyone for all the support in this past few days. We will dearly miss you,¡± wrote Al Etcheber in a Facebook post.
Smith, 34, was a mother of two from Alberta, Canada and worked as a professional model. ¡°She was a beautiful soul. She was a wonderful mother and our family is going to miss her dearly,¡± her aunt Val Rodger told the Toronto Star.
Her company, Sophia Models, also expressed their condolences. ¡°She worked as a model for our agency for over 10 years. She was always a friendly face and had a very caring spirit.¡±
Rivera, 21, was a fourth-year student in a healthcare management program at Cal State San Bernardino, and friends described her as a warm, energetic person. In an email to students, university president Tomas Morales called her death ¡°a devastating loss for the entire CSUSB family¡±.
¡°She passed away so young and she had everything going for her,¡± wrote a family friend who set up a GoFundMe page on her family¡¯s behalf.
Barnette was in Las Vegas celebrating a friend¡¯s 30th birthday, when she was struck with gunfire in the chest. Barnette, 34, worked on the culinary team at Disneyland in Anaheim and the company expressed condolences in a post Tuesday. ¡°Our thoughts are with her family, along with our support, during this incredibly difficult time,¡± the post read.
¡°She was a ray of sunshine,¡± Destiny Calderon, a former coworker, told the Orange County Register. ¡°She always had a smile. If you had a bad day, she would lift you up.¡±
That¡¯s a sentiment numerous friends shared on her Facebook wall. ¡°Your words would dry my tears, your laugh would make me smile,¡± a friend wrote.
A longtime cast member at Disneyland who lived in Anaheim, Guillen Rocha gave birth to her fourth child, Austin, just six weeks ago. ¡°My heart breaks that you were taken from your babies far too soon,¡± wrote a friend on a GoFundMe started by one of Guillen¡¯s cousins.
Even though Guillen Rocha was shot, it was reported she managed to climb a fence at the concert venue, but later died at the hospital.
A 34-year-old mother of three, Hannah and her husband had come to the festival with three other couples. Dave Ahlers, Hannah¡¯s father-in-law, confirmed Monday evening to the Las Vegas Review Journal that Hannah had been struck in the head by the gunfire.
¡°She was possibly one of the most beautiful women I have ever seen, with a heart to match,¡± a friend told the Los Angeles Times. ¡°She never came across with the diva mentality she easily could have had. She was a devoted mother and wife.¡±
The music festival was a destination for country music fans far and wide, and the reported deaths are likewise, from all over the US and Canada.
Sonny Melton, 29, who lived in Big Sandy, Tennessee, and worked at a nearby hospital, was the first victim publicly identified. Family members confirmed to the news station WSMV that he was killed in the gunfire.
His wife, Heather Melton, told WZTV that her husband had shielded her from bullets on the ground when the shooting began. ¡°He saved my life and lost his,¡± she said.
A friend of the couple told the Paris (Tennessee) Post-Intelligencer that the two had gotten married about a year ago.
¡°I want everyone to know what a kindhearted loving man he was, but at this point I can barely breathe,¡± Heather Melton wrote to USA Today.
The couple both worked at Henry County medical center in Tennessee, he as a registered nurse, she as an orthopedic surgeon. ¡°The thoughts and prayers of the entire HCMC family are with Sonny and Heather¡¯s families,¡± the center¡¯s chief executive, Thomas Gee, said in a statement.
The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation reported that a 23-year-old British Columbia man, Jordan McIldoon, was also among the dead, according to his parents. Another concertgoer posted on Facebook on Sunday night that McIldoon had ¡°died in [her] arms¡±.
¡°We only had one child,¡± McIldoon¡¯s parents told CBC. ¡°We just don¡¯t know what to do.¡±
Local outlets in Bakersfield, California, have confirmed with family members that 20-year-old Bailey Schweitzer was killed in the attack. The Los Angeles Times reported that Schweitzer was a receptionist at Infinity Communications and Consulting, a software company in Bakersfield.
¡°Bailey was always the ray of sunshine in our office on a cloudy day,¡± Infinity¡¯s chief executive Fred Brakeman told the Times. ¡°No one could possibly have a bad day when Bailey was around. If you have ever called or visited our office, she was the perky one that helped direct you to the staff member you needed.¡±
San Bernardino County officials announced in an email to staff that Dana Gardner, 52, a longtime county employee, had died Monday morning from gunshot wounds sustained in the onslaught. Five other county employees who were also at the concert are said to have been injured.
Bob Dutton, the assessor-recorder-county clerk, told the Sun that Gardner, the deputy recorder, was a ¡°go-to¡± person and a ¡°dedicated public servant¡±.
Jessica Klymchuk, an Edmonton, Alberta, mother of four, was also confirmed dead in the shooting. In a statement, Alberta¡¯s premier, Rachel Notley, called the incident an ¡°act of violence that is almost beyond comprehension in a time of peace¡±.
Klymchuk worked as an educational assistant, librarian and bus driver for St Stephen¡¯s School, according to the Edmonton Journal.
Tina Moore, who had worked with Klymchuk, said: ¡°She did so much for her children. She went over and above for them.¡±
Klymchuk was in Vegas with her fiance for the music festival.
The first Las Vegas resident identified as a victim was 20-year-old Quinton Robbins, a student at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.
On Facebook, a woman who identified herself as Robbins¡¯s aunt wrote: ¡°He was the most kind and loving soul. Everyone who met him loved him. His contagious laugh and smile. He was truly an amazing person.¡±
Rhonda LeRocque, of Tewksbury, Massachusetts, was identified as a victim by relatives. Her family told Boston 25 News that she was with her husband, Jason, when she was shot in the back of the head.
¡°[Her husband] thought she ducked and she didn¡¯t ? she was caught in the back of the head,¡± Rhonda¡¯s half-sister Jennifer Zelenski said.
Denise Burditus, of Martinsville, West Virginia, was also among the first victims to be identified.
Her husband, who was also at the concert, mourned her on Facebook. ¡°It saddens me to say that I lost my wife of 32 years, a mother of two, soon to be grandmother of five this evening in the Las Vegas shooting,¡± Tony Burditus wrote. ¡°Denise passed in my arms. I LOVE YOU BABE.¡±
The city of Manhattan Beach, California, lost Sandy Casey, 35, a middle school teacher. A local paper, the Daily Breeze, reported that Casey was a special-education teacher from Redondo Beach, and had attended the Route 91 Harvest festival with a group of fellow teachers, principals and staff members from Manhattan Beach Unified, which shared news of her death in an email to parents.
Casey was engaged to Christopher Willemse, a special-education aide, according to the Daily Breeze. He shared a photo of the couple on Facebook and wrote: ¡°As I sit and mourn such a beautiful life gone too fast, all I can say is look up and watch the birds fly high and free today as that¡¯s where I feel you smiling down upon all of us. I love you baby girl! Love you to pieces!¡±
Also of Manhattan Beach, Rachael Parker was a 10-year veteran civilian employee of its police department.
Her mother, Robin Monter, told KXLY, a TV news station in Spokane, that Parker was ¡°brilliant and had a heart of gold¡±. She also said her daughter volunteered with the elderly and the homeless.
A 2015 graduate of Riverside Polytechnic high school in Riverside, California, Angela Gomez was identified by the Riverside Unified school district as one of the victims, according to the Las Vegas Review-Journal.
On Monday, a Facebook post read: ¡°It is with heavy hearts that we inform you that one of the victims of the Las Vegas shooting tragedy was a 2015 graduate of Riverside Poly High School.¡±
The high school¡¯s staff described Gomez as ¡°fun-loving young lady with a great sense of humor¡± who had a ¡°warm heart and loving spirit¡±.
Gomez, a cheerleader in high school, was described by her former English teacher and cheer coach, Lupe Avila, as a ¡°wonderful young woman who had her whole life ahead of her¡±.
An off-duty Las Vegas police officer and military veteran named Charleston Hartfield was identified by friends as a victim, according to the Las Vegas Review-Journal.
¡°I don¡¯t know a better man than Charles,¡± said Troy Rhett, who said he¡¯d been friends with Hartfield for eight years. ¡°They say it¡¯s always the good ones we lose early. There¡¯s no truer statement than that with Charles.¡±
Stan King, who wrote ¡°RIP Brother¡± on Hartfield¡¯s Facebook page, told the Review-Journal that Hartfield was ¡°one of the nicest guys ever¡± and would be remembered as ¡°the most true-blue American guy I¡¯ve ever met¡±.
A close friend of Adrian Murfitt watched as medics tried unsuccessfully to resuscitate him, the New York Times reported.
Murfitt, 35, was a commercial salmon fisherman in his home state of Alaska. He loved playing hockey, could fix almost anything mechanical, and was devoted to his dog, Paxson, a Western Siberian Laika.After working long hours throughout the summer, he and two other childhood friends booked tickets for the Route 91 Harvest country music festival, his sister, Shannon Gothard, told the Times.
Murfitt was with his friend, Brian MacKinnon, when shooting broke out, Gothard told the Times.
¡°He was just having a good time, enjoying himself and got shot in the neck,¡± she said of her brother. A woman standing next to Murfitt was shot in the head, MacKinnon told the family.
He watched as medics tried to resuscitate Murfitt, though the medics told MacKinnon to leave the scene for his own safety.
Susan Smith, 53, was a popular office manager at an elementary school in Simi Valley, Calif. She had two children.
Her father, Tom Rementer, told the New York Times that his daughter was a ¡°wonderful person¡±.
Smith had worked at the Vista Elementary School in Simi Valley, California, for three years and the school district for 16 years, a spokesperson for the school district told ABC News.
She had been attending the festival with two friends, who both survived.
Lisa Romero-Muniz, a high school secretary from Gallup, New Mexico, was an ¡°incredible loving and sincere friend, mentor and advocate for students¡±, the Gallup-McKinley County Public Schools interim superintendent, Mike Hyatt, said in a statement.
¡°As a colleague, she was also outgoing, kind and considerate of all those she worked with,¡± he said.
A wife, mother, and grandmother, Romero-Muniz had been in Las Vegas with her husband to see the country music singer Jason Aldean for their wedding anniversary.
¡°She was beyond excited,¡± said Rosie Fernandez, her friend and supervisor at the high school where they worked told the New York Times.
¡°For her husband to remember her anniversary and do all of that, this was a big thing for her.¡±
John Phippen of Santa Clarita, California, was with his son, Travis, at the country music festival in Las Vegas when he was struck by a bullet in the lower back, Reuters said.
Travis, an emergency medical technician, carried his father to a car that took them to Sunrise Hospital and Medical Center, where the elder Phippen died from his injuries.
¡°He was my best friend,¡± Travis told the Los Angeles Times. ¡°He never did anything wrong to anybody. He was always kind and gentle. He was the biggest teddy bear I knew.¡±
In the chaotic scene, Travis had been shot in the arm but didn¡¯t realise it until he arrived at the hospital. He is staying with family in the Las Vegas area until the Clark County coroner releases his father¡¯s body.
A GoFundMe page set up by a neighbour described Phippen as having ¡°a heart that was larger than life and a personality to match¡±.
Roybal, 28, was a United States military veteran who served in Afghanistan. He was in Las Vegas celebrating his birthday with with his mother, who survived, ABC News reported.
In a Facebook post from July, Roybal described what it was like to come under gunfire during combat.
¡°I remember that first day, not sure how to feel. It was never fear, to be honest, mass confusion. Sensory overload ¡¦ followed by the most amount of natural adrenaline that could never be duplicated through a needle,¡± he wrote.
¡°Unfortunately, as the fights continue and as they as increase in numbers and violence, that excitement fades and the anger is all that¡¯s left.
¡°The anger stays, long after your friends have died, the lives you¡¯ve taken are buried and your boots are placed neatly in a box in some storage unit.
¡°Still covered in the dirt you¡¯ve refused to wash off for fear of forgetting the most raw emotions you as a human being will ever feel again.
¡°What¡¯s it like to be shot at? It¡¯s a nightmare no amount of drugs, no amount of therapy and no amount of drunk talks with your war veteran buddies will ever be able to escape.¡±
The Los Angeles Times reported that Thomas Day Jr was a 54-year-old home builder from Riverside, California.
He went to the festival with his four children, who are all in their 20s and 30s. Day¡¯s father told the LA Times that Day¡¯s children were ¡°crushed.¡±
¡°He was the best dad,¡± Day Sr said. ¡°That¡¯s why the kids were with him.¡±
Tonks was a mother of three who lived and worked in Las Vegas. ¡°She was a very nice woman who was full of life and energy,¡± her former church counselor Tracy Downey told the Las Vegas Review Journal.
After word of her death, Tonk¡¯s employer, Technologent, began a GoFundMe page for her family ¡°in their hour of need¡±. Tonks ¡°has been a light to everyone she¡¯s touched¡± one friend wrote on GoFundMe. ¡°The world will not be the same without her. We must carry on in her honor. Love and prayers to her family!¡±
Friends flooded the fundraising page with photos, of them together and captions like ¡°you made me smile and always knew how to enjoy life¡±. She was 46.
A kindergarten teacher and mother of two, Parks lived in Lancaster, California with her husband Bobby, who sustained a non-fatal gunshot wound in the arm Sunday. Family told People Magazine that Parks had just earned her master¡¯s in education earlier this year and was in the process planning her husband¡¯s 40th birthday party.
Jenny was ¡°absolutely beautiful and very intelligent, had a wonderful sense of humor and was so kind¡±, Bobby¡¯s uncle told the magazine.
Her husband¡¯s Facebook page shows a smiling family at Dodgers games and on vacation. ¡°Great picture of such an amazing family!¡± one friend wrote.
Christiana Duarte, 22, had gone to the country music festival with her brother¡¯s girlfriend, Ariel Romero. Although both women were shot, Romero was expected to recover after having undergone surgery, family friend Danette Meyers told the New York Times.
¡°I can¡¯t tell you how this has hit all of us,¡± she said. ¡°This is just unbelievable. This senseless, violent act is just killing us all.¡±
Victor Link, from Orange County, California, died after taking a bullet to the chest.
Victor¡¯s father, Loyd Link, 52, who worked in the financial services industry and lived with his partner, Lynne Gonzales, told the New York Times: ¡°Rob, his best friend, who is a firefighter and a paramedic, picked my son up and carried him to a safer place and tried to resuscitate him,¡± Loyd said. ¡°But it didn¡¯t happen.¡±
Beaton died while shielding his wife, Laurie, from gunfire, his family told the New York Times. His father-in-law, Jerry Cook, said Beaton covered his wife¡¯s body with his own, and was hit. ¡°He told her he loved her,¡± Cook said. ¡°Laurie could tell he was slipping. She told him she loved him and she would see him in heaven.¡±
Beaton¡¯s son, Jake, paid tribute to his father on Facebook. ¡°Lost my best friend,¡± he wrote. ¡°I love you so much more than you could ever imagine. Please watch over our family. You will forever be remembered as our hero!¡±
The daughter of Mexican immigrants who became American citizens, Melissa Ramirez, 26, had recently received a promotion at the car insurance company where she worked, her cousin, Fabiola Farnetti, told the New York Times. She added: ¡°She always helped her parents, and just wanted to be there.¡±
The family had held out hope that she had survived the shooting, but her father identified her remains at the Las Vegas morgue early on Tuesday, the NYT reported.
Heather Alvarado, 35, was described as a wife, mother, sister, friend, and ¡°so much more¡±, according to a GoFundMe page. The page reportedly said that Alvarado was ¡°always the first to help out¡± and ¡°anyone she comes across she makes them feel like family.¡±
Alvarado had travelled with her family to attend the concert in Las Vegas, and the police said she died after being injured in the shooting. ¡°It is with heavy hearts that we acknowledge the passing of Heather Warino Alvarado, wife of Cedar City firefighter Albert Alvarado,¡± Sergeant Jerry Womack, spokesman for the police department in Cedar City, Utah, said in a statement.
Kurt Von Tillow, 55, had travelled to Las Vegas for the concert with his family members and they were together when the attack occurred. Von Tillow¡¯s wife and daughter escaped unharmed but his sister was shot in the thigh and his niece in the ankle, his brother-in-law Mark Carson said. The NYT said both were expected to recover.
Von Tillow¡¯s wife told her family members she was herded out of the area by the authorities amid the chaos of the shooting scene, Carson told the New York Times. ¡°That was probably the hardest part for her ? having to leave him there.¡±
Carson described Von Tillow as being ¡°the most patriotic person you¡¯ve ever met¡± and told the NYT: ¡°Guarantee you, he¡¯s covered in red, white and blue right now, with a Coors Light in his hand, smiling with his family and listening to some music.¡±
Andrea Castilla, 28, was visiting her younger sister, Athena, in Las Vegas for her birthday when the attack took place, said the Las Vegas Review-Journal. The Review-Journal said her death was even more painful as her boyfriend was intending to propose to her. Athena said: ¡°I told him, ¡®I hope you knew she would say yes in a heartbeat.¡¯¡±
Castilla wanted to make those afflicted with illnesses feel beautiful. For Castilla, from Huntington Beach, California, makeup was more than just a job for her. She told her brother that she wanted to serve cancer patients with her talents. The same disease had taken her mother¡¯s life when she was a teenager, reported the Review-Journal.
¡°That¡¯s what made her really happy. Making people feel beautiful,¡± Athena told the Review-Journal. ¡°She just had such a great outlook on life.¡±
Lisa Patterson, a Californian mother of three, was a great person who was active in church, her husband of over 30 years, Robert Patterson said. He added that they loved coming to Las Vegas. ¡°We liked the atmosphere of Vegas, so a lot of times when we took a vacation, it was to Las Vegas,¡± he said.Patterson was not with his wife when the attack occurred, said the Review-Journal, and came to Las Vegas to find his wife after the incident happened. While his two older children came with him, he said his youngest eight-year-old daughter stayed home. Patterson said he wanted to be the one to tell his daughter her mother is dead.
A friend of Lisa Patterson, Andy Tamilin, said: ¡°Lisa had an infectious energy and fierce love for her family, and we are beyond heartbroken for Bob and their three kids.¡± He added that Patterson and her husband ¡°spent hours donating their time and energy to help the girls of our community¡±.
Pennsylvania youth sports coach Bill Wolfe Jr, a 42-year-old father of two, was celebrating his 20th anniversary with his wife, Robyn, when the shooting happened, said the Las Vegas Review-Journal.Wolfe was a Little League coach and coached the Shippensburg youth wrestling programme for children in kindergarten through sixth grade, Tony Yianiello, head coach of the Shippensburg high school¡¯s varsity wrestling team, told the Review-Journal. ¡°Some people simply live in the community, Bill lived for his community,¡± Yianiello said.
Michelle Vo, 32, of Eagle Rock, California, who worked in financial services for the Pasadena branch of New York Life Insurance Co, was remembered on Tuesday in the US House of Representatives.Vo, who was a native of San Jose, California, was described as ¡°an ambitious hard worker, known for her charisma and fierce independence¡± in a statement read on the House floor by representative Jimmy Gomez.
Derrick ¡°Bo¡± Taylor, 52, was a Californian correctional lieutenant who led inmates to fight wildfires, said the Las Vegas Review-Journal. He was a 29-year veteran of the California department of corrections and rehabilitation, and celebrated his most recent birthday on 25 September, a department spokesman, Bill Sessa said.
It added that Taylor led a staff of nine, and together they were responsible for more than 100 inmates in coordination with Cal Fire, the state¡¯s firefighting arm.
The flowery graffiti on the wall of the narrow lane that leads into this quiet rural community reads ¡°Welcome to Agua Santa¡± and ¡°good vibes¡±. The name means holy water. But when the Dixon family from Bromley, south-east London, turned off the main highway around 4.30pm last Sunday afternoon, it turned into hell.
The Dixons ? Eloise and Maxwell and their three young daughters ? were looking for a rest and a restaurant on the long drive from Rio de Janeiro to Paraty, a colonial tourist town farther down Rio state¡¯s ¡°Green Coast¡±. They were nine miles from the port of Angra dos Reis, and had no idea that armed men were manning a drug sales point on the stone steps that climb steeply up a narrow alley that faces the graffiti.
The men opened fire, hitting Eloise twice, shooting out two tyres, and leaving bullet holes in her passenger door and headrest. She survived and, a day later, was eating, drinking and walking. The family declined to speak to media, and have since left the town. But Angra may take longer to recover.
¡°The shot that hit the tourist hit the whole population,¡± said Carlos Vasconcelos, president of the Angra Tourism Foundation.
The shooting opened wounds in this city of 191,000 people. Angra needs tourism ? its industries are bleeding from Brazil¡¯s crushing recession and endemic corruption, and its poorer communities, like many across Rio state, increasingly live in the shadow of drug gangs, like the one that opened fire on the Dixons¡¯ silver Renault.
The repercussion was instant. The state governor rang Angra¡¯s mayor, worried about the family¡¯s health. They were put up in a luxury hotel and provided with a driver, a translator and a security guard. Now 40 new police officers are being hired and social projects planned for poor communities. The gang has left Agua Santa, for now.
¡°What a shame it took an incident with a foreigner to call attention to the barbarity in the city,¡± said Samuel Assuncao, 47, host of a local radio show.
Most tourists roll through Angra without incident. But others in Rio state have been attacked after inadvertently driving into gang-run areas.
In 2015, Regina Murmura, 70, was shot and killed after she and her husband were directed by their satnav app to a dangerous favela in Niteroi instead of a seaside strip with the same name. An Italian motorcyclist was shot dead after he rode into the Prazeres favela near Rio¡¯s cobbled Santa Teresa neighbourhood last December. An Argentine woman died of gunshot wounds in February, after a carload of tourists made the same mistake.
Maxwell Dixon and his family had been looking for water ? ¡°agua¡± in Portuguese ? said chief detective Bruno Gilaberte, leading police to believe a linguistic confusion could have led the Dixons into Agua Santa.
In his handwritten statement, Maxwell Dixon wrote that they had put Angra into the GPS and had been directed down a narrow road ¡°past two men who appeared to be pointing guns at us. We took the next left turn hoping it would get us back on to the main road. It was a dead end. We turned around and were slowed down by several men who then started shooting at us.¡±
Like many in Rio state, Dayna de Souza, 22, who works in a family-run corner store in Angra, knows how to drive into her gang-controlled community: slowly, car windows down, interior lights on, headlights off.
¡°You can¡¯t hide from it,¡± she said. ¡°It is our daily life.¡±
Gilaberte said his investigation has identified the three shooters. ¡°The case is practically resolved,¡± he said. Superior offices had paid special attention to the case.¡°There is an impact not just in the perception of public security, but also an economic impact in the city.¡±
One bullet perforated superficial layers of Eloise Dixon¡¯s thorax, another went into her abdomen and out the other side, but no major organs or veins were hit. The family were rushed to hospital in Angra, and within 40 minutes Eloise was in surgery.
¡°She really could have died. She was very lucky,¡± said Rodrigo Mucheli, medical director of Angra¡¯s Japuiba Hospital, which deals with a couple of gunshot wounds a week and has a 24-hour surgery.Despite a few resorts, Angra¡¯s tourist industry is concentrated around its port, where boats take swarms of people to the beaches of Ilha Grande, a tropical island. Many richer Brazilians have holiday homes along this lush, forested coastline. But the city is grittier. Outside its narrow central streets, Angra clambers up steep hillsides. According to Brazil¡¯s 2010 census, 35% of its population live in favelas ? Brazil¡¯s ramshackle, unregulated, low-income communities.
¡°There is a social divide,¡± said Natalia Guimaraes, 18, who works in a town centre art shop. ¡°It is a place to pass through.¡±The fishing industry is concentrated on sardines, while a small port serves the offshore oil industry. The shipyard has shed two thirds of its workforce since the oil price fell and its prime customer, Brazil¡¯s state-run oil company, Petrobras, was engulfed by an enormous corruption scandal, while a similar investigation has halted work on a new nuclear reactor.
Lounging around near the port, one unemployed man, 21, wearing a fake gold watch and a baseball cap described how his friend joined a gang for a week after losing his job, but was then talked out of it. Another four gang members he knew were killed by police; a fifth left in a wheelchair.
¡°This is the life of a bandit. One dies, another enters, it never ends,¡± he said, having avoided the temptation himself. The Observer has withheld his name for fear of reprisals.
Mayor Fernando Jordao said crime had increased in the city when gangs came from Rio de Janeiro, after armed police bases were installed in gang-run favelas there in the run-up to the World Cup and Olympics.
¡°Today it suffers with a problem of violence,¡± he said.
Washington Drumond, 44, lost his job as a boilermaker at the BrasFELS shipyard after Petrobas slashed its investments. Three oil rigs it ordered sit rusting in the yard, and 6,000 workers have been let go.
¡°It¡¯s us, the workers, who pay the bill,¡± said Drumond, who now does occasional shifts as a security guard.
He scoffed at Rio¡¯s political leaders. The crisis-racked state is so broke it is months behind with salaries, leaving police short of fuel and ammunition. The murder rate for the first six months of this year was the highest since 2009. Yet governor Luiz de Souza ? known as Pezao, or ¡°Big Foot¡± ? has opened a ¡Ì610,000 bid for a private jet contract. His predecessor Sergio Cabral is in jail, accused of creaming off $100m in bribes.
¡°Unfortunately, that¡¯s the way it is ? high unemployment, our leaders stealing,¡± said Drumond.
Shopkeeper Graciele Juliani, 31, president of the Agua Santa residents¡¯ association, found out via Facebook.
¡°It was unbelievable,¡± she said. ¡°We are very sad. We too have children. We feel the pain of the couple.¡±
The neighbourhood is not even a favela, she said. Just a humble community of a thousand people, a few streets between the highway and the forested hills. A few boys flew a kite on a grassy soccer pitch, near a stream black with sewage, and two sorry table tennis tables.
¡°Nobody steals here,¡± she said. ¡°This is a quiet neighbourhood.¡±
Neither she nor Drumond would talk about the gang. One resident, speaking anonymously out of fear of reprisals, said three years ago armed drug traffickers from the Red Command, a notoriously violent Rio gang and one of three operating in Angra, set up drug sales here, just a few yards from the busy highway. Residents kept out of their way, in the knowledge that many communities in and around Angra dos Reis were suffering similar incursions.
Down at the Metalworkers¡¯ Union, policy director Manoel Sales drew a clear parallel between the layoffs and the city¡¯s rising crime ? with gangs moving into communities and invading others. ¡°Unemployment has consequences and one consequence is violence,¡± he said of the shooting. ¡°It is the reflection of all this.¡±
YouTube has made changes to its algorithms after it was strongly condemned for promoting offensive and false conspiracy theory videos about the Las Vegas shooting.
The move to shift the way it delivers search results contradicts YouTube¡¯s earlier statements defending its performance during breaking news.
After a gunman inside the Mandalay Bay hotel fired on a music festival, killing 58 people and injuring hundreds more, videos claiming that the shooting was a hoax and a ¡°false flag¡± spread like wildfire on YouTube, earning millions of views.
A ¡°Las Vegas shooting¡± search on the Google-owned platform led users to numerous videos questioning whether the government was lying about the basic facts of the tragedy and suggesting victims could be ¡°actors¡±.
On Wednesday, a YouTube spokesperson insisted the site was highlighting reputable videos and said conspiracy videos the Guardian discovered on its search page did not violate its standards. But less than 24 hours later the company altered its position, implementing changes to its platform in a direct effort to better promote reputable sources.
A YouTube source confirmed on Thursday that the company tweaked its search algorithms late on Wednesday night, hours after survivors and victims¡¯ relatives criticised the company for prominently featuring videos with hoax claims. YouTube had been working on this change for months and decided to push it out early this week, the source said. It is unclear how the new algorithm functions or whether it is effective in downgrading falsified accounts of the attack.
YouTube declined to answer questions about the changes, which were first reported in the Wall Street Journal.
YouTube¡¯s initial statements, followed by its readjusted algorithms, speak to the broader ethical challenges technology companies face regarding their role in providing major platforms for fake news and propaganda. Facebook and Google were both caught promoting rightwing blogs and conspiracy sites hours after the Las Vegas shooting, forcing the corporations to admit that they had made mistakes in spreading misinformation about the identity of the shooter.
Silicon Valley has faced heightened scrutiny over the last year for allowing political propaganda and fake news to reach wide audiences, possibly playing a part in Russia¡¯s efforts to interfere with the US presidential election.
Conspiracy theorists regularly spread unsubstantiated ¡°false flag¡± conspiracy theories after mass shootings in the US, sometimes leading to real-world harassment and bullying of victims and survivors. But some fear that YouTube and other social media sites have amplified the problem by connecting people who believe tragedies are staged and actively presenting them with similar content that confirms their suspicions.
A ¡°Las Vegas shooting¡± search on Thursday, after the algorithmic change had taken place, produced substantially more reputable videos, mostly from mainstream news sources. One conspiracy video still featured prominently, however, along with a warning from the creator of the clip that YouTube was trying to censor it. It later disappeared.
Beyond the search page, it was unclear if any conspiracy videos had been taken down altogether; at least some short films that argued the shooting may not have happened at all remained active on YouTube, rapidly garnering hundreds of thousands of views. Next to these videos, YouTube also continued to promote related content with blatant propaganda and false news.
That included: ¡°CNN Crisis Actor Caught Red Handed¡± (450,000 views), ¡°Government Staged Las Vegas Mass Shooting¡± (300,000 views) and ¡°Las Vegas Shooter At Mandalay Bay Hotel Part Of FBI Undercover Sting Operation¡± (400,000 views).
Stephen Melanson, whose wife and daughter were both shot in the attack, told the Guardian earlier he believed YouTube should remove footage suggesting the deadliest mass shooting in modern US history wasn¡¯t real.
¡°When I see my wife fighting for her life with a gunshot wound to her chest, and my daughter was also shot, it¡¯s pretty conclusive evidence that it did happen.¡±
It is nearing midnight on a chilly and beautiful January night in Yemen. The hum of the hospital generator outside my window, overlaid with the sound of gunfire (sometimes celebratory, sometimes not), is something I have grown used to over the past three months.
My phone rings: it is the duty doctor calling for back-up after receiving multiple gunshot patients in the emergency room of Al Nasser general hospital in Al Dhale governorate.
My heart doesn¡¯t race like it used to. From never seeing gunshot wounds back home in India, to now seeing them on a daily basis, I am learning a lot here in Yemen. This night is busier than most.
One patient has had his left eye socket blown out by a bullet and is still talking coherently ? it is like a scene from a movie. Another has a gunshot wound to the head and is being mechanically ventilated, while a third has multiple gunshots through his abdomen. Our medical team manages these patients calmly and efficiently. Later the staff joke with me about how, in the middle of last year, when the frontline was at their doorstep, this was daily life for them.
The resilience of people here is something I will always admire. Rabia, one of our cleaners, goes about her daily routine with a smile. Not for a second would you guess that she has lost all three of her sons in the war. Larger-than-life billboards of their handsome faces rise over the streets, along with the images of many others who have lost their lives.
War wounds aren¡¯t the only medical needs we have to tackle. Yemen is grappling with a dual burden: malnutrition and vaccine-preventable diseases on the one hand, chronic conditions like heart disease and strokes on the other. Mental health issues are completely ignored. Due to the war and uncontrolled inflation, healthcare is either unavailable or inaccessible to large parts of the population.
There are severe shortages of fuel, food, electricity and water, too.
These are times when international humanitarian law is just another meaningless phrase. The indiscriminate attacks on hospitals and civilians ? either targeted or conveniently labelled collateral damage ? add an extra layer of complexity. It sometimes makes us question whether what we are doing here in Yemen is worth the risks we take. It is a question to which the answer is obvious from the outset; a question that we should never have been forced to ask ourselves, knowing how grave the humanitarian needs are.
The moments of helplessness faced by a wartime doctor are many. We know there will always be another flood of patients pouring into our hospital. This is yet another forgotten war where the most helpless and innocent are the most affected.
Then there are the little victories and small joys that make our so-called career choice seem worthwhile: sharing a meal with 200 men at the local sheikh¡¯s house; working with an amazing team of Yemeni staff who poke fun at me and my attempts to learn Arabic; discussing the Bollywood movies that make men cry without fail.
I will never forget one little girl who came in with a severe chest infection and whose mother had all but given her up for dead. We used all our persuasive powers to convince the mother to let us continue treatment for a little while longer. A week later, the mother walked out of the hospital with her smiling, playful infant in her arms. Her sheepish grin was all the thanks we needed.
I now leave Yemen with a heavy heart. It has definitely been one of my most challenging experiences: dire needs for healthcare in the face of insecurity.
My hope and prayer is that this war will end soon. If that is asking too much, until then, may humanitarian assistance reach every person who needs it in this breathtaking country.
Dashboard and body camera footage obtained by the Guardian show police officers shoot Jeanetta Riley, a 35-year-old woman with a history of mental health problems who was wielding a knife outside a hospital in Sandpoint, Idaho. Riley died from the gunshot wounds. All officers on the scene have since been cleared of any wrongdoing, and the family has received no apology over the incident
Mauritanian President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz was returning to the capital, Nouakchott, from his weekend getaway in Tweila on Saturday evening. He reportedly approached one of the military checkpoints 40km outside the city that have been conducting car searches and identity checks in recent weeks. "Jumpy" guards failed to recognise their leader and opened fire on a perceived security threat. Reports vary, but most confirm Abdel Aziz was wounded in the arm or abdomen or both.
The government quickly assured the public the shooting was an accident. "On his way back to Nouakchott, the presidential convoy was shot by a Mauritanian patrol¡¦ as they did not recognize his convoy," Communications Minister Hamdi Ould Mahjoub said on television. "The president was shot on that occasion but he is lightly wounded and his life is not threatened."
He was rushed to hospital in Nouakchott where he reportedly spent hours with doctors. Officials say he was able to walk into the hospital and on Sunday he broadcast a statement on the state-owned TVM channel from his hospital bed. "I want to reassure everyone about my state of health after this incident committed by error by an army unit on an unpaved road near Touela," he said. "I want to calm all citizens¡¦ Thanks to God, I am doing well."
Despite reports he was recovering well in Nouakchott, Abdel Aziz was flown to the former colonial power France on Sunday for further medical treatment. Residents in the capital are said to have widely accepted the shooting was an accident, as the president can often be seen around the city with little security and could have more easily been targeted while walking or playing sport.
But it's unknown what has happened to the soldiers who supposedly shot at the president and the "accident" is hard to believe. Governments in Mauritania are changed by coups. Nearly every leadership since independence in 1960 has involved the military. Abdel Aziz took office in 2008 after he and other army chiefs ousted President Sidi Ould Cheikh Abdallahi, who had been a rare commodity ? an elected leader.
Recently, Abdel Aziz said that despite opposition calls for him to step down he plans to see his term through to 2014. "I have no intention of leaving power because I think that in a democracy, change must be done through the ballot box." But opposition is mounting from both internal and external sources and he has enough enemies who want rid of him.
Opposition groups and lawmakers have at times painted the president as a despot unable to manage the country and accused him of diverting from the Dakar accords that led to his 2009 election. Protests flared during the Arab Spring but with little international coverage it was dubbed "the overlooked uprising" by Al-Jazeera.
In May this year, Sharif Nashashibi?saw conditions that could have led to a revolution. "There is also the possibility, or perhaps even the probability, that the protests in Mauritania will intensify, mainly because the government seems not to have learned from the mistakes of other Arab regimes that are under threat. It has used a combination of repression and pledges of reform that have left Mauritanians unconvinced and more frustrated,".
Commentators believe that if the attack was not an accident, the gunmen were more likely to come from an al-Qaeda linked group. Abdel Aziz has earned praise from the West for leading a military push against al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb. It's also earned him death threats and attempts on his life. The region is currently extremely hostile with both Islamist and Tuareg groups seizing control of vast areas in northern Mali and refugees flooding across the border.
The government called talk of an assassination attempt an overreaction. Neither protestors nor insurgents have been able to harm the president, and even his own troops could but scratch him. Yet, more questions are being asked now Abdel Aziz has been taken to France. The incident will be remembered as either an assassination attempt the government tried to hide or the worst day a Mauritanian soldier could possibly have at work. DM
Money is like water in the sea,' Bob Marley insisted earnestly on that late 1976 afternoon as our conversation by the Sheraton pool in Kingston turned to business and politics. 'People work for money, den dem don't want to split it. It's that kind of attitude,' he continued scornfully. 'So much guys have so much - too much - while so many have nothing at all. We don't feel like that is right, because it don't take a guy a hundred million dollars to keep him satisfied. Everybody have to live. Michael Manley say 'im wan' help poor people... They feel something good is gonna happen,' he said reflectively, then continued: 'We need a change from what it was. It couldn't get worse than that.' Sounding more sure, he concluded fiercely, almost defiantly, 'You have to share. I don't care if it sounds political or whatever it is, but people have to share.'
Bob's last comment might sound odd: why should the outspoken revolutionary poet be so concerned about anyone's political misinterpretation? But we were speaking just days before the free Smile Jamaica concert he was due to play for the people, and large crowds are always volatile. Bob was conscious of the heightened tension that always surrounded the build-up to a Jamaican election. His generous humanist statement could be labeled as socialism. People might say he was definitively backing Michael Manley's People's National Party (PNP), with its affiliation to Castro and Russia, and rejecting the Jamaican Labour Party (JLP), headed by Edward Seaga, dubbed in widespread graffiti as 'CIA-ga' because of the American secret service's overt support of his team. That could mean trouble.
Times had changed since Bob and his wife Rita had backed Manley in the 1972 election. The island seemed to be full of guns. People were more desperate and violent, and Bob was a far more public figure. Now he had to screen every word and be extra-careful not to be misunderstood.
For an effectively fatherless mixed-race child of the rural areas and stifling ghettoes to be receiving more acclaim than any Jamaican ever was a wake-up call that a new society had actually arrived. Bob's international success made him a symbol of a troubled island's hopes. He now found himself in the unenviable position of being the prize of a tug-of-war between the island's two political parties. As the material for his album Exodus began to brew in 1976, the island was convulsed with lethal political agitation, and Bob's star status did not confer immunity - rather, it was the reverse. 'People see him as a big man now, gone international,' as his boyhood friend Mikey Smith explains. 'Everyone want Bob Marley deh 'pon their team.'
Less than two decades after Jamaican independence, the system left behind by the British had frayed, and the infrastructure was crumbling. I remember arriving in Jamaica from Los Angeles once, having been shopping earlier that day, and how obscene it was to compare LA supermarkets' towering stacks of produce with the island supermarkets, with shelves so empty they seemed to sell air. There was music, style and creativity in abundance, but shortages of everything else from rice to rolling papers. Driving anywhere was an adventure, as the ancient taxis seemed to be held together with rubber bands and hope, and the roads all over the island had potholes like craters. Power cuts were as regular as police roadblocks.
Deadly tribal wars, the seeds of which had been planted centuries before, were being fought between the opposing JLP and PNP areas. Families turned against one another from block to block. People risked death to cross Kingston's disputed areas, such as the one between Fifth and Seventh Streets, or the several desolate areas where soldiers camped out and extracted rough justice from any passer-by.
Bob had his own way of dealing with it. During another conversation, when he paused from taking energetic puffs on a communal 'chalice' and passed it on, I asked if he was bothered much by the police. 'I hardly ever on the streets to get stopped. I is a man who don't really travel up and down too much,' he replied laconically. Effectively, the stress on the streets was keeping Bob at home, just like his bred'ren in the ghetto.
When his plan for a free concert became known, he was approached separately by the JLP and the PNP, both eager for his support, but he chose to do a non-aligned event, albeit inevitably with government approval. 'Michael [Manley] jumped on it with full endorsement,' says Wailers' art director Neville Garrick. 'He said, "All you guys have to do is rehearse."' At first Manley proposed that the show be held on the lawns at Jamaica House, the Prime Minister's official residence. 'No, mek it somewhere central that don't have no political affiliation,' Bob insisted.
Finally, the show was billed as a collaboration between the Wailers and the government's cultural office. So Bob was righteously angered when it was sprung on him that the election date had been brought forward to coincide with the Smile Jamaica show. Despite his best intentions, the Wailers's noble offering to the people had effectively been co-opted by Manley's PNP. The populist project now appeared to be little more than a promotional gig in the very territorial spirit Bob was trying to discourage. It was a cynical move on the PNP's part, which took a lot of the joy out of the idea. The lightly sardonic voice of Bob's lawyer, Diane Jobson, drops uncannily into Bob's rasping snarl as she recalls how he said, 'Diane, dem want to use me to draw crowd fe dem politricks.'
Bob had encouraged his Hope Road home in Kingston to become a 'safe house,' a neutral zone, in which youths caught up in the turmoil of the warring political factions could hang out and reason away from the old violent mindset. At a certain point, Bob's utopian vision of the yard as sanctuary was bound to collide with street conflicts. He was in a delicate position, and to add to the irony, the enemies Bob was trying to reconcile were often relations, old neighbours and schoolmates.
I had been invited to stay at Hope Road, and around 5.30 one morning I woke, restless, and looked out of my bedroom window. Bob was standing in the otherwise quiet yard under the big mango tree, talking angrily to two men whom I couldn't see clearly. There was something ominous in their exchange. Even at a distance, Bob's body language was different from anything I'd seen before tense and taut, he was brusquely intent on making his point. It was unsettling - and clearly a very private moment. I turned away and went back to bed. But sleep wasn't easy. For me, this brief and somehow troubling glimpse suggested a new side to this complex man, the rough one that gave him the name Tuff Gong.
Among those who've reasoned about Bob's Exodus , it's usually held that the album is wholly a product of the traumatic event that was about to take place. But in reality, Bob already sensed that he was living in a time where imminent horror coloured everyday beauty. Proof positive: relaxing in the rehearsal room late one night, I heard music floating up from below, so I drifted down the stairs that ran outside the building. The moonlit yard under the mango tree was crowded with around 15 people sitting on the ground, the downtown kids who found refuge there and the Dreads who made it home. Tucked under the veranda of the lit tle house was a bedroom with nothing but some hooks on the wall, a chair, and Bob, in dusty sandals and shorts, sitting on the edge of a narrow iron bed. It was just the kind of scenario that comes to mind when Bob lilts through the lines, 'We'll share the shelter/Of my single bed' on 'Is This Love'. Bob was playing his guitar, trying on chords for size.
A young girl sat at the other end of the bed, her eyes fixed on Bob. He sang to her and to all of us as he strummed wrath and reality on his 12-string acoustic. His picking provided rhythm and hints of harmony as he sang, 'Guiltiness, rest on their conscience, oh yeah...'
Everyone there was absorbed by the unaffected anger that stalked his crisp delivery. The words hit home to anyone who'd ever been aware of injustice in their lives - which meant everyone present, and many who would eventually hear the song in its majestic cut on the Exodus album.
For many around town, 3 December 1976 was proving a difficult day, anyway. Bob's label boss Chris Blackwell was on his way to Hope Road when he stopped off at Lee Perry's Black Ark to check out some new tracks. Sitting in the small, womb-like control room, covered with red, green, and black fake fur and stills from kung-fu flicks and westerns of the spaghetti and Hollywood varieties, Blackwell was entranced by the neon towers and canyons of Perry's spacey new track, 'Dreadlocks in Moonlight', topped with the producer's own warbling vocals. 'Me waan the Gong to voice dis ya one,' explained Scratch. Blackwell said: 'No. You can't improve on your own version. This is great. Make me a tape to carry.'
So he sat down to watch Scratch work. No one mixed like Scratch. The skinny little man in a peak cap, undershirt and shorts danced with the four-track Teac machine from which he coaxed such shattering sounds. Darting in toward the knobs and faders, he'd flick them as if flame flashed from his fingertips, then twirl and pirouette, dipping back just in time to catch the beat. Blackwell was unsurprised when technical hitches made the promised few minutes stretch into over an hour. He resigned himself to being late for the Wailers' rehearsal.
For Neville Garrick, the day was also not going as planned. Heading for rehearsal, he was stopped by a policeman and arrested for weed. Neville was already somewhat edgy, still shaken by the reaction he'd got when handing out his newly designed stickers for the Smile Jamaica concert to some Dread friends. One man retorted: 'Me no put no political label deh pon my vehicle, Rasta.' Garrick was confused, thinking everyone should know that Bob was performing an apolitical event. But then he looked at his own design again, and realised that the rising sun he'd drawn to symbolise the dawning of a new, more loving island
Over at the villa of Dermot Hussey, the island's most noted reggae broadcaster, the Wailers' keyboard player, Tyrone Downey, was lying on the floor trying to relax from the stress that had been going down at Hope Road. Sensitive and imaginative, Downey had been the baby of the Wailers, a protege of Family Man, who had first used him on sessions when Downey was 12. He'd been nicknamed 'Jumpy' when he first went on the road because of his wariness. Now Downey was legitimately nervous. Ever since the change of the election date that had so alarmed Bob, men had been bearing down on Hope Road, dropping heavy warnings to the singer. 'Me hope you know what you a do, Dread,' they would say, looking grim.
Hussey offered to drop off Downey and his girlfriend at Hope Road for the rehearsal on his way to do Progressions , his 8pm radio show. 'I'll be back,' Hussey announced as he pulled away from Hope Road. He was in the habit of stopping by number 56 when Bob was readying for a tour, and as the rehearsals went on from nine at night until two in the morning, Hussey had no intention of missing out on that night's session, bad vibes or not.
He didn't know about the two plainclothes cops who had been stationed outside the house during rehearsals, due to the gravity of the political situation, and thus didn't notice their absence.
Diane Jobson had arrived at Hope Road in good spirits, bearing especially sweet grapefruit and some herb from Bob's favourite grower. But soon a profound nausea she'd never experienced before washed over her. 'Is you hold de nice spliff, Diane?' Bob called out. Chuckling, she handed over some luscious buds and went to relax and play with some of the yard children in Neville Garrick's little house in the compound.
In the newly built narrow galley kitchen by the rehearsal room, breezy and bright with a door at each end, Gilly the cook's blender was whirring as he sliced and diced fruit with quick precision. He could hear the Wailers' rehearsal perfectly. They had already polished 'Baby We've Got a Date', 'Trench Town Rock', 'Midnight Ravers', and 'Rastaman Chant'. Gilly remembers that Bob called a break, saying: 'Fams, you tek over rehearsin' the horns.' So Family Man Barrett led David Madden and the Zap Pow Horns into 'Rastaman Vibration'. Now that the Smile Jamaica show was almost upon them, everyone was looking forward to it, despite the tension in the town. Bob was light-hearted, joking around with Fams and Carly Barrett, who was sitting on a stool. Juggling the fat grapefruit Diane had brought, he asked Garrick to drive Judy Mowatt of his backing group, the I-Threes, to her Bull Bay home, a couple of hours away. She had had bad dreams the previous night and was still shaken. Garrick protested not only did he want to see the rest of the rehearsal, but the best herbsman on the island was due to pass through with his wares. It was getting dangerously near Christmas, when good weed is hard to come by, and Garrick planned to lay in a store. 'Neville, you gwan like you love herb more than the rest of we,' teased Bob. 'Don't worry, we gwan hold some for you.'
Thus reassured, and seeing fatigue in Judy's kindly eyes, Garrick took the keys to Bob's new silver BMW and they set off. Now, this was a famous set of wheels, chosen because the initials suggested Bob Marley and the Wailers, and Bob didn't let many people drive it. Everyone started moving. Rita Marley headed to her Volkswagen. Bob's friend and neighbour Nancy Burke was asked by Seeco, the Wailers' percussionist, to move her car so the girls could leave.
Burke was feeling buoyant that night she'd just got back from chaperoning Bob's sometime girlfriend Cindy Breakspeare as she won the Miss World contest in London. It was a great coup. In fact, even entering the contest had been daring of Breakspeare though Jamaican Miss World entrants had traditionally supplied wives for many local politicians, including Edward Seaga, Michael Manley's socialist Jamaica had dropped its Miss World membership, along with Cuba. Because of the tension in town, guards had lately been posted at the entry to Hope Road's circular drive, but no one was there and the gate was closed. Still, even that inconvenience couldn't dent Burke's good mood.
She was dragged away from the kitchen by a little girl, one of Breakspeare's protegees, to join Diane Jobson and the other kids in Neville's cottage. Out on the road, Garrick, Mowatt, and the Hope Road doorman, a Trench Town youth named Sticko, were already way off in the distance. Before steering her car through the gateposts, Rita paused to let another vehicle drive in - then screamed and jammed on the brakes as pain seared her scalp.
The other car's unseen passenger had shot her through her window and scorched on into the yard.
'Give me a juice, nah!' A booming cry in the kitchen made Bob and Gilly look up as Bob's manager, a swaggering, sharp-witted hustler called Don Taylor, strode in. But Taylor was followed almost immediately by three intruders - gunmen, charging in through the doors at either end of the kitchen. One brandished two automatics like he was Jimmy Cliff in The Harder They Come . They fired round after round, the sound deafening as the kitchen became a battlefield. The Wailers and their militant Dread posse were caught off guard. Indeed, even though this was the moment Bob had been dreading, when the shock came, he froze. Everything went into slow motion. He felt something push him, and he fell down only later did he realise it was streetwise Don Taylor, raised working the volatile bars and brothels of the Kingston waterfront. The bullet aimed at Bob's heart instead smashed into his upper arm. Later, Bob was advised that an operation to remove it carried the risk of loss of control of his fingers, so the lead would stay there till he was in his coffin.
The noise of four automatics belching bullets suddenly silenced.
'I recognise one guy,' mutters Gilly tersely. He won't name names. 'They came in with two guns blazing and I ran out thanks to the power of the Most High.' With an expertise learnt in his child hood flights from the Trench Town cops, Gilly raced through the yard and over the wall. In the rehearsal room, bullets smashed into Carly's drum stool, and he fell to the floor. The next shots hit the wall, right where his head had been. Fams was trying to run for it but got caught up in the leads trapped under Carly's stool. The brothers disentangled themselves and sprinted for the bathroom, where they hid in the bathtub behind the shower curtain, hearts pounding. The Wailers's newest American guitarist, Donald Kinsey, was so freaked he left the island and the band the next day, never to return.
Tucked away in Neville's little house, Diane Jobson and Nancy Burke had no idea what was happening. Silently, both women prayed as gunfire spasmed as if it would never stop. Terrified, the children cowered under the bed. When the shooting stopped, all their hearts convulsed. In the silence, unthinkable questions shouted inside their heads. Had anybody - everybody - been killed? And was Brother Bob still alive?
The eerie quiet was broken when Burke heard Seeco's wrenching shout outside their window. ' Blood claat! Is Seaga men! Dem come fe kill Bob!' That view was endorsed by word in the street, as passers-by said that before the ambulances and police arrived, they saw a car shoot out of the yard. But instead of driving uphill in the direction of University College Hospital, as might have been expected of any improvised transport for the wounded, the car headed downtown, straight toward the notorious Tivoli Gardens - the JLP headquarters, still a virtual no-go zone three decades on.
'Down in Trench Town, we heard it as a news flash over the radio, and as soon as we hear it, we know what the source was, even if we didn't know the person till after. We knew what it was about,' definitively states Bob's old Trench Town neighbour Michael Smith, of the group Knowledge. 'All of these things came from the politics, Bob deciding to do the concert for Manley when he had turned down doing a show for the JLP. At that time they had Bob Marley as an international star, and everyone wanted Bob on their side.'
So Bob's best intentions for a non-political concert had bitterly backfired.
Jobson rushed out into the yard, where Rita was reeling, bleeding from the head. She begged, 'Diane, take me to the hospital!' But seeing that Rita was still standing and coherent, Jobson ran past her and into the kitchen. Just minutes before, it had been packed and buzzing. Now she was horrified to find an empty room and see a half-peeled grapefruit lying on the floor in puddles of blood . She breathed again only when she heard Bob call out to her weakly, 'Is alright, Diane. Me here still.'
Comforting the hysterical children, Nancy Burke watched as Bob walked out in his blood -drenched shirt between two policemen to the waiting car, holding his arm in its reddening bandage. The anguished self-questioning, as so often happens in the unfolding stages of trauma and grief, would soon come. He didn't look shaken or fearful. The Tuff Gong was angry.
Without doubt, war correspondents are wise to wear helmets and flak jackets while sending dispatches from shell-pounded streets crackling with gunfire.
But when Sky News reporter Alex Crawford rode into Tripoli this week on a rebel pickup truck, she was more worried about celebratory gunfire ? because of the danger posed by bullets landing on her head.
While some early studies conjectured that bullets shot upwards simply vanished into space, the threat from falling ordnance is not to be dismissed.
To explore the finer details of the rule that what goes up must come down, Benjamin Robins reported in 1761 that a largebore bullet fired upwards returned to Earth three quarters of a mile away and half a minute later. More precise studies followed.
In the autumn of 1910, an RL Tippins hauled a Maxim machine gun to the tidal mud of the river Stour in Suffolk and fired two bursts of about 30 bullets straight up into the air.
With stopwatch in hand, he timed the bullets as they fell to Earth, recording flight times of about 55 seconds.
The conclusion from the experiments was that the bullets reached 2,750 metres (9,000ft), taking 19 seconds to rise and almost twice as long ? 36 seconds ? to fall.
Recalling the experiment, Tippins said: "We had no head cover, but trusted to the wind to carry them away far enough to miss us."
But what do we know today of the risk of injury from falling bullets?
Between 1985 and 1992, a group of physicians at the Martin Luther King/Drew medical centre in Los Angeles studied victims of gunshot wounds and identified 118 thought to have been hit by falling bullets. These included people struck by bullets while going about their everyday business, far away from known gunfire.
Only six of the regular bullets were traced by the police, to shootings that occurred up to a mile away. But some people were hit by high velocity rounds whose sources were never traced.
For those hit by falling bullets, the chance of the wound being fatal was far higher than a typical shooting. The hospital put deaths from regular shootings between 2% and 6%, while for those struck by falling bullets the death rate was close to one third.
The reason was simple ? those unlucky enough to be hit by falling shells were more likely to be struck on the head, and while the bullets were travelling slower after being shot into the sky, they were still capable of smashing skulls.
According to the doctors, a spent bullet falls back to Earth with a speed of between 90 and 180 metres per second. A bullet travelling at less than 60 metres per second can cause a fatal skull injury, they added.
The hazard posed by celebratory shots led Los Angeles city council to ban the firing of bullets into the air in 1989. Later, sales of bullets in the runup to New Year's Eve were prohibited.
The issue was picked up in 2003 by the US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, which raised alarm over the dangers of falling bullets discharged during new year celebrations in Puerto Rico in 2003/4. They logged 19 injuries, including one death, over two days.
The perils of falling bullets are not confined to war zones and inner cities. In 2008, American chef Paul Prudhomme was setting up his cooking tent on a golf range ahead of the PGA tour in New Orleans when he flinched from what he thought was a bee sting.
When he shook his shirt sleeve, a .22 calibre bullet dropped out. According to police, it could have been fired one and a half miles away. Prudhomme continued to cook with a hole in his chef's coat and a cut to his arm.
The danger of falling bullets, from celebrations linked to New Year's Eve, weddings and religious festivals, has prompted governments around the world to launch educational programmes to discourage trigger-happy partygoers.
A TV and radio campaign in Macedonia in 2005 used the slogan: "Bullets are not greeting cards ? celebrate without weapons."
A Norwegian hunter tracking moose in the country¡¯s wild north may at first have congratulated himself when he realized he had killed two of the majestic beasts with a single shot.
But he soon realized his success had little to do with marksmanship and more to do with fences: the animals, it turns out, were captives in a zoo.
On 7 October, the hunter ? whose name has not yet been released by police ? was with a group who had specially trained dogs to track the animals, according to CNN.
After one of the dogs caught the scent of the moose and went under the zoo¡¯s fence, the hunter fired a shot. The bullet passed through one of the animals and was lodged in the other¡¯s stomach. The first died immediately, the second had to be euthanized.
The Polar Park Arctic Wildlife Center in northern Norway originally had five moose, according to the Local, a Norwegian news site. Following the incident, the head of the hunting group approached Polar Park staff and explained what happened.
¡°I was surprised. I had my mouth open for a while,¡± Polar Park¡¯s CEO, Heinz Strathmann, told CNN. ¡°This has never happened before ? and I don¡¯t think it will happen ever again. It is a one of a kind.¡±
Strathmann told the Local that the incident was ¡°very sad¡± and ¡°not OK¡±. But Arne Nysted, chairman of the wildlife tribunal in Troms County, said that it was ¡°a regrettable mistake made in connection with lawful hunting on the outside of the park¡±.
Hunting is popular but strictly regulated in Norway. Hunters must be over 16 years old and pass a proficiency test. The practice has been under increased scrutiny worldwide following the killing of Cecil, one of Africa¡¯s most famous lions, by a Minnesota dentist.
The zoo has asked that the hunter cover the costs of acquiring two new moose, which cost $3,500 each, according to Strathmann. But they will not press charges. Superintendent Katrine Grimes told CNN that the man could still be prosecuted under Norway¡¯s Wildlife Act, which regulates humane hunting.
Shortly before leaving America for Britain, after 12 years as a correspondent, the relative of one of my son¡¯s friends politely declined my invitation to visit us in London.
¡°I don¡¯t think I could go to Europe,¡± she said. ¡°It doesn¡¯t seem safe.¡±
Try as I might I could not suppress a laugh. My wife and children are African American. I am British. We were living in Chicago.
¡°The odds of you being shot dead here are far greater than of you being killed in a terrorist attack over there.¡±
When the president uses his executive powers to ban more than 200 million people from entering America, ostensibly in the interests of security, and then, in the same week, the House of Representatives relaxes background checks for gun ownership, one is compelled to question the sense of proportionality when it comes to security. Whom do they intend to keep safe? By what means? And at what price to liberty?
Let us leave aside for the moment the fact that since 9/11 not a single American has been killed in a terrorist attack by a citizen from the countries on this list. The reality is that an American is at least twice as likely to be shot dead by a toddler than killed by a terrorist. In 2014 88 Americans were shot dead, on average, every day: 58 killed themselves while 30 were murdered. In that same year 18 Americans were killed by terrorist attacks in the US. Put more starkly: more Americans were killed by firearms roughly every five hours than were killed by terrorists in an entire year. It is unlikely that scrapping a rule requiring extended background checks for gun purchases by some social security recipients suffering from mental illness will improve the situation.
One need not downplay the importance of terrorism here. Terrorism is not only murderous. In its ability to spread anxiety and undermine democratic engagement with violence it is also deeply reactionary. Rather than galvanising people around a cause it divides them in the crudest manner possible ? on the basis of fear. That¡¯s as true when America kills innocent civilians. But the fear most Americans experience daily isn¡¯t imported ? it¡¯s home grown. That¡¯s true across the board, but particularly true for some minorities. Every day seven children and teens are shot dead in the US. Firearms are the biggest killer of young black people and the second biggest killer of all children, after traffic accidents. When the new US education secretary, Betsy DeVos, suggests schools might need guns to protect themselves from grizzly bears, she¡¯s clearly not capable of gauging the real threat to American children.
While researching my book about all the young people who were killed on one random day ? 23 November 2013 ? every single parent of a black teenager who lost a child that day that I interviewed said they assumed this might happen to their kid. ¡°I didn¡¯t think it would be him,¡± said one mother. ¡°I thought it would be his brother.¡± ¡°You wouldn¡¯t be doing your job as a father if you didn¡¯t,¡± said another.
Doriane Miller is a primary-care physician who practises on Chicago¡¯s South Side, where one teen was killed that day. Dr Miller noticed a significant number of young black patients arriving with psychosomatic symptoms ? many also had tattoos bearing the names and dates of loved ones who had been lost to gun violence. When she tried to talk to them about it they shut down.
¡°There was that sense that this is the way it is in my life and in my community,¡± she said. ¡°There is a learned hopelessness around this. And so you suck it up, you man up, and you move on.¡±
Many of the areas where these young people live, and die, look like war zones ? empty lots, half-demolished houses, depleted infrastructure, militarised policing, potholed roads, boarded-up houses, abandoned churches. But more importantly, they are experienced as such. People (mostly young men) disappear ? either to prison or to the grave ? leaving a huge gender imbalance. Times are hard, and the informal economy is rife, meaning there are spivs everywhere making an ostentatious display of their wealth. The one major difference is that whereas wars often cement communities as people band together against a ¡°common enemy,¡± in these areas the enemy is everywhere and, potentially, anyone.
These, too, are Americans. They too deserve security. Indeed it is a nonsense to talk about securing the borders from the outside world if many of those who live within those selfsame borders continue to live in a state of constant fear.
Many of those who insist that, when it comes to terror, one must balance individual rights against collective security, become curiously silent when it comes to adapting their interpretation of the right to bear arms to the issue of public safety.
In 2002 I interviewed the late Maya Angelou about her views on the 9/11 terror attacks. ¡°Living in a state of terror was new to many white people in America,¡± she told me. ¡°But black people have been living in a state of terror in this country for more than 400 years.¡±
If the current administration applied just half the zeal to making sure all people in the country feel included and safe as they do to making sure some outside of it feel excluded and anxious, the impact on Americans¡¯ sense of security would be repaid exponentially.
After a judge blocked the Muslim ban over the weekend Trump said that if there was another terrorist attack America should blame him. Between me writing this article and you reading it the chances are another child will be shot dead. Whom, I wonder, should we blame for that?
? Gary Younge is the author of Another Day in the Death of America, A Chronicle of 10 Short Lives
A teenager shot 11-year-old Rhys Jones by mistake while aiming at rival gang members across a pub car park, Liverpool crown court head today at the start of the trial into the schoolboy's murder.
Sean Mercer, 18, allegedly a member of the Croxteth Crew gang, denies murdering Rhys, who the court heard was shot in the back with a Smith and Wesson .455 revolver.
At one stage during the trial, Rhys's mother, Melanie Jones, left the court in tears as the prosecution began to describe her son's last moments.
The jury was shown a CCTV clip of Rhys crossing the car park of the Fir Tree pub and reacting to the sound of a bullet striking a container nearby. He turned to look at the container before being hit by another bullet. The 11-year-old fell to the ground where he later died in his mother's arms.
The prosecutor, Neil Flewitt, QC, told the jury that Rhys had ended up "walking into the line of fire" on his way home from football practice on August 22.
"At almost exactly the same time as Rhys Jones walked into the car park, a hooded gunman on a bicycle approached the scene from the rear of the Fir Tree and took up a position on the grass in front of the fence running alongside the path on the far side of the car park," he said.
The gunman fired three shots across the car park, one of which hit Rhys, killing him. The gunman was Mercer, from Croxteth, Liverpool, said Flewitt.
According to Home Office pathologist, Dr Paul Johnson, Rhys was shot in the back, slightly above the left shoulder blade and the bullet exited from the front right side of his neck.
When paramedics arrived, Rhys was already in cardiac arrest and was rushed to Alder Hey children's hospital but all attempts to resuscitate Rhys failed.
Immediately after killing Rhys, Mercer "set about distancing himself from the tragic events at the pub.
"He moved quickly to dispose of his clothing, his pedal cycle and the gun that he had used to such devastating effect," he said.
Rhys was not Mercer's intended victim, the prosecutor added. "On the contrary, it is the prosecution case that he was the innocent victim of a long-running feud between rival gangs operating in and around the area of the Fir Tree public house."
Six co-defendants - Boy M, 16, James Yates, 20, Boy Q, 17, Melvin Coy, 25, Gary Kays, 25, from Liverpool, and Boy K, 17 - are charged with assisting an offender. For legal reasons, some are not named. Yates is also accused of possessing a firearm, and Boy K faces charges of possessing two firearms and ammunition.
When Mercer was arrested, he claimed he was at Boy K's house but the prosecution said they had evidence which contradicts this.
Boy K's mother said when Mercer called at the house, she was sure they left while Emmerdale was showing, and her son returned about 30 minutes later.
"So if [her] recollection is correct, Sean Mercer had left her house before Rhys Jones was killed and she does not support his alibi for the time of the murder," Flewitt said.
Police also installed a hidden listening device inside the home address of James Yates, which the prosecution alleges recorded various "significant conversations" that took place in the days that followed.
All defendants deny all the charges. Flewitt said all were members or associates of the Croxteth Crew, which has a rival gang in Norris Green known as either the Strand Gang or Nogga Dogs. Since 2004, there had been at least 70 cases of criminal damage and assault including the use of firearms associated with both gangs, he said.
Flewitt said that until Rhys's killing the best-known manifestation of this feud had been the murder of Liam Smith, a member of the Strand Gang, who was shot dead outside Altcourse prison on August 23 2006. Four members of the Croxteth Crew were convicted in connection with this ? three of murder and one of manslaughter.
On the day that Rhys was killed, three young men - Wayne Brady and two others - who were Strand Gang members or associates "left the relative safety of Norris Green and entered what, for them, was the hostile environment of Croxteth".
They were in the area because Brady wanted to borrow a bicycle from a friend who lived nearby.
Flewitt said their presence brought Mercer to the Fir Tree pub and he was shooting at them when he killed Rhys.
"Sean Mercer's interest in Wayne Brady was not limited to general gang rivalry," Flewitt said. "Rather evidence suggests there was some more personal animosity between them."
A witness told police she knew Mercer and had said to her: "Brady's gonna get it."
He described the murder of Rhys Jones as "yet another, and perhaps more tragic, example of the mindless and indiscriminate violence that is a feature of the rivalry between the Croxteth Crew and the Strand Gang".
The activities of the Croxteth Crew not only provided the setting for the murder of Rhys Jones but also led to the involvement of the other defendants, Flewitt said.
"It is the prosecution's case that the strength of the loyalty that existed among gang members and their associates explains the speed and enthusiasm with which [the six defendants] did all that they could to help Sean Mercer avoid responsibility for the dreadful events," he said.
Flewitt said everyone who heard or read about the circumstances of Rhys Jones's death was both shocked and saddened at the loss of such a young life. "You will, no doubt, share the dismay of all decent people that such an appalling event could take place at a busy public house and in broad daylight."
Flewitt said Rhys Jones was born on September 27 1995 and was 11 years old when he died. He lived with his parents and older brother near the pub. Rhys had just completed his final year at Broad Square junior school in Croxteth and was looking forward to going to secondary school.
"Like many boys of his age, Rhys Jones loved football. He supported Everton and played for the under 12 team at the Fir Tree pub."
The trial continues. It is expected to take six to eight weeks.
Three people were injured when a man stormed into a Zurich mosque and opened fire on people at prayer, police said.
Two of the three men ? aged 30, 35 and 56 ? were seriously injured in the attack near the main train station in Switzerland¡¯s financial capital.
The suspect, a man aged around 30 according to witness accounts, had fled the mosque and was believed to have left the building, police said.Police said a body was found nearby, but could not comment on any link to the shootings while investigations were still under way.
They said they had collected evidence inside the building and could not further comment on the motive or the suspect¡¯s background. He was wearing dark clothing and a dark wool cap.The centre is registered as an association enabling Muslims to practise their religion, particularly through instruction on Islamic beliefs and teachings, as well as providing for the preservation of Islamic cultural values and scientific seminars, according to Swiss business data website Moneyhouse.
Across Switzerland, two thirds of its 8.3 million residents identify as Christian, but the nation has been wrestling with the role of Islam as its Muslim population has risen to 5%, particularly with the arrival of immigrants from the former Yugoslavia.
In 2009, a nationwide vote backed a constitutional ban on new minarets.
The Federation of Islamic Organisations in Switzerland said the centre was not a member and it did not have any direct knowledge of the incident.
Another umbrella group, the Swiss Islamic Central Council, was not immediately available for comment.A gun and two knives were found at the home of a man shot dead by police on Wednesday, investigators have said.
The Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC), which has opened an investigation into the shooting, formally identified the man as Richard Davies, 41, and said a postmortem found he died from a gunshot wound to the chest.
Davies¡¯ neighbours and friends have expressed their shock at the incident in St Neots, Cambridgeshire, describing the hydraulic fitter, a father of three, as a ¡°very nice person¡±.
¡°The day everything happened, he came in the shop, we chatted normally. He said his missus was going out, he came and bought a few beers and said he was going to sit at home and enjoy himself. That was the last chit-chat we had,¡± said Sohan Tumber, 60, the owner of a local shop where Davies was said to be a regular.
Tumber, who described his son as a good friend of Davies, said he first heard about the shooting the morning after it happened, while taking his grandchildren to school.¡°We are still in shock, we can¡¯t get over it,¡± he said. ¡°He liked Indian food, he came in and took recipes off my wife. He was a nice family man, I don¡¯t know what went wrong.¡±
Davies¡¯ mother, Gill Davies, wrote on Facebook: ¡°God only knows how things came to this ... Richard was loved and respected by a lot of people, family and friends alike.¡±
On Friday afternoon, a forensic tent and large cordon remained outside the house Davies shared with his wife Samantha and children. At least 10 forensic officers were at work at the scene and a heavy police presence remained.
Gordon Woodend, 62, a neighbour, said he had been watching football when he heard his dogs barking and a commotion outside.
¡°I went out to get them. As I went out there, I heard two shots,¡± he said. ¡°I got the dogs, went upstairs and looked out of the back-room window. I saw the police breaking down Richard¡¯s door, go in with automatic rifles, about six of them.¡±
Describing the impact the incident had had on the community, he said: ¡°People are just baffled really. Normally, it¡¯s pretty good round here. Everyone¡¯s shocked, he seemed a nice enough guy.¡±
The IPCC associate commissioner Guido Liguori said: ¡°It is essential when the police use lethal force that there is a thorough and independent investigation of that decision, and I would like to assure all those concerned that we will investigate the full circumstances surrounding this incident.¡±
Police said they were called to Davies¡¯ home at about 7.45pm on Wednesday over concerns for the people inside. Neighbours reported hearing raised voices shortly before the officers arrived.
Davies was shot about 15 minutes later. The IPCC said early evidence suggested that only one shot was fired by the officers who attended. The incident is the first case of a firearm being discharged during an operation in Cambridgeshire.
Mass shootings have become a banal fact of death in America. (Last year there were 283 incidents in which four or more people were shot.) The nation as a whole, meanwhile, has become newly sensitised to racial violence, with growing activism around police shootings. In April video of a white policeman shooting Walter Scott ? an unarmed African American ? eight times in the back in as he ran away in North Charleston, South Carolina, went viral.
But the shooting of nine black church-goers in Charleston (not far from where Scott was killed) by a white gunman in what police are treating as a ¡°hate crime¡± marks a doubling down on the nation¡¯s twin pathologies of racism and guns. Both are deeply rooted in the nation¡¯s history since its founding: neither are going anywhere soon.
The timing of this particular tragedy, given the heightened consciousness and activism around the #BlackLivesMatter movement, provides a particular lens through which to view this massacre. When Barack Obama won the South Carolina primary in 2008 a huge multiracial crowd gathered in the state capitol of Columbia and chanted ¡°race doesn¡¯t matter¡±.
With each new well-publicised account of racial violence, be it at the hands of the state or the public, claims that the arrival of a black president signals the arrival of a post-racial era collapses under the weight of its own delusion.
Racism isn¡¯t dead. We know this because it keeps killing black people.
The fact that Clementa Pinckney, a state senator, was among the dead indicates that nobody is safe. The fact that it took place in a church during a prayer meeting indicates that nowhere is safe.
America does not have a monopoly on racism. But what makes its racism so lethal is the ease with which people can acquire guns. While the new conversation around race will mean the political response to the fact of this attack will be different, the stale conversation around gun control means the legislative response to the nature of this attack will remain the same. Nothing will happen.
After Adam Lanza shot 20 primary school children and six adults in Sandy Hook, Connecticut, in 2012 before turning his gun on himself, nothing happened. Seven children and teens are shot dead every day in America and nothing happens.
So these nine victims will join those who perished before them ? a sacrifice to the blood-soaked pedestal erected around the constitution¡¯s second amendment that gun lobbyists say guarantees the right of individuals to bear arms. Where guns are concerned this is what passes for American exceptionalism ? an 18th century compromise with fatal 21st century ramifications.
For the parishioners of the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston nothing will ever be the same again. And for those who have the power to prevent it happening again, nothing will change.
One of the leaders of the gang of river pirates who robbed and murdered a British kayaker in the Amazon has been killed, police investigating the death of Emma Kelty have said.
Another man accused of being a leader in the attack, Arthur Gomes da Silva, was arrested and confessed his role, they said.
Evanilson Gomes da Costa, known as Baia, 24, was shot on Tuesday night and later died of his wounds in hospital, according to a statement by one of the suspects, who said the dead man had fired shots at former primary school headteacher Emma Kelty.
Later on Wednesday, police said they had arrested Arthur Gomes da Silva, known as ¡®Bera¡¯, the gang¡¯s other leader, and that he has admitted his involvement.
Kelty, 43, was canoeing alone from the source of the Amazon to the Atlantic when she went missing in the Solimoes area, as the upper stretches of the river are known. The area is notorious for its pirates and drug trade.
She triggered a distress signal last Wednesday, but despite an extensive search by Brazilian police and navy, her body has not yet been found. Kelty knew she was heading into a dangerous area and even joked on her Facebook about the risks she faced.
Kelty is believed to have pitched her tent on Boieiro island, facing the remote community of Lauro Sodre, before she set off her locator flare last Wednesday. A suspect arrested on Monday in Codajas said Kelty was approached by two people. Five others arrived and the group stole her belongings.She was shot twice with a sawn-off shotgun, attacked with a machete and dumped in the river before the gang stole her mobile phones, money, a drone, a tablet and GoPro camera and tried to sell them, according to the suspect. Police named him on Wednesday as Jardel Pinheiro Gomes, known as Kael, and corrected his age to 19, not 17 as he had previously claimed.
An unnamed 17-year-old was also arrested as well as a third man, named as Erinei Ferreira da Silva, 28.Police were hunting four further suspects, including Gomes, but learned on Wednesday that he had been hit by gunfire inside his house in Coari, a city around two hours from Lauro Sodre where Kelty is believed to have been murdered.
¡°According to investigations, people supposedly linked to the drug trade in the area were named as responsible for the execution of the offender, who was 24. He was rescued, taken to a hospital in the municipality, but succumbed to his injuries and died around 8.30am today,¡± police said in a statement. Gomes was one of the leaders of the ¡®Water Pirates¡¯ or ¡®Water Rats¡¯, a gang who stole merchandise, killed people and were connected to the drug trade, the police statement said.
Jose Barradas Junior, chief detective in Coari, told the Guardian he believed da Costa was killed by rival gangsters for the possessions his gang had taken from Kelty and before dying named the man who shot him.
Later on Wednesday police found Arthur Gomes da Silva, 28, hiding in the forest near Lauro Sodre, after an anonymous tip off to the Brazilian navy, and he has since admitted his involvement, Barradas Junior said.
Barradas Junior said one of the investigating officers had told him that locals reported seeing Kelty pass by in her kayak hours before she was killed. They had tried to warn her of the danger she could be in and offered their houses for her to sleep in for safety, but she did not understand.
¡°Neither she nor they could communicate. They were trying to tell her the risk she was running,¡± he said.
He said Gomes da Costa and his accomplice Arthur Gomes da Silva, known as Beira, were two of the leaders of the Water Rats. Two other suspects are said to still at large, named as Erimar and Nilson Ferreira da Silva, both brothers of Erinei.
According to the testimony, Gomes da Costa and da Silva approached Kelty¡¯s tent and da Costa shot her with a shotgun, wounding her. When she shouted in pain, they assumed she was Peruvian and possibly carrying drugs.
Barradas Junior said: ¡°They are used to robbing Peruvians on the river, they have already done this with other foreigners who passed there, generally strangers who carry drugs.¡±
Wounded, yet conscious Kelty was shot again dragged to the river and attacked with a machete, Barradas Junior said. Then, he said, ¡°they threw her in the middle of the river, which is the deepest part¡±.
Barradas Junior said the authorities should warn other Britons planning to visit the Amazon to travel in organised groups, and not alone ? especially in the Solimoes river area, which is a major trafficking route for drugs from Peru and Colombia that are heading to Europe.
On Wednesday Kelty¡¯s brothers Piers and Giles and her sister Tash posted a tribute on her Facebook. It said: ¡°Emma was an active and determined sister who challenged herself, latterly through her adventures on the Pacific Coast Trail, as well as in the South Pole and Amazon River.¡°In a world that is today a much smaller place, the explorer in our sister found herself seeking ways to prove that challenges were achievable. We are extremely proud of our sister who was dearly loved by us all and her strength will be sorely missed. We wish to give our immense thanks to the Brazilian navy, police and Foreign Office for their action and support,¡± they wrote, adding links to three charities Kelty had been fundraising for: Cancer Research UK, Cystic Fibrosis Trust and Teach Africa.
The mass shooting of a concert crowd in Las?Vegas is deeply shocking. It seems to have shocked even President Trump. But the oleaginous teleprompted piety with which he responded could not be further from his contemptuous indifference to the plight of Puerto Rico. At least 58 people are known to have been murdered in Las?Vegas. Hundreds are wounded and the death toll will undoubtedly rise. But it will never approach the toll caused by hurricane Maria in the Caribbean island a fortnight ago. Although the official death toll there stands at only 17, the morgues are full in hospitals all over the country: it is only the lack of electricity, water, and transport that prevents them from being tallied. Sixty of the island¡¯s 69 hospitals are still cut off from power; half the 3.4 million inhabitants still lack safe drinking water. These shortages, which are largely the result of government inaction since the onslaught of the hurricane, will likely kill hundreds more in the weeks to come. Mr?Trump took more than a fortnight to arrange a visit to Puerto Rico, where he could for once do some good; a visit to Las?Vegas, where he can pose with the police, was arranged almost instantly.
The differing responses to the two catastrophes is a stark illumination of racialisation of first- and second-class citizenship in the US. The Puerto Ricans are brown-skinned Spanish speakers. Although they are American citizens, they have no political representation in Congress and no votes in presidential elections. The crowd in Vegas were predominantly white, celebrating a form of music that is also largely white, and where the iconography, by a sour irony, is all in favour of the right to bear arms. They get the treacly appeals to Jesus; the Puerto Ricans were dismissed as ¡°ingrates¡±. The crowd in Vegas are offered Mr Trump¡¯s prayers; the thirsty Puerto Ricans had a golf tournament dedicated to them by a President who chose to spend the weekend at one of?his luxury resorts rather than help them. They?have no water? Let them drink from golfing trophies.
The dreadful killings in Las Vegas are part of a ghastly pattern whose lunacy has been dulled by endless repetition. Mass shootings are so common that the satirical paper the Onion has run the same headline four times in the last two years, each time prompted by a different mass murder: ¡°¡®No way to prevent this¡¯ says the only nation where this regularly happens¡±. Yet the dramatic headline-catching slaughter is not the only dreadful aspect of the situation. Eighty or more people are killed by gunshots every day across the USA. So far this year, there have been 11,565 gun deaths in the US; 545 children under the age of 11 killed or injured, and 273 incidents classified as mass shootings.
There is a desolating pointlessness to these statistics. A third of the gunshot deaths are suicides, as it appears the Las Vegas gunman¡¯s was too. In a country where guns are so freely available, legally or otherwise, and the nearest thing to a state-funded and universally available mental health service is the prison system, the figure for suicide is hardly going to diminish. The desperation of the suicidal and the rage of the homicidal are not the only forms of derangement around the subject of guns. The persistent refusal of Congress even to consider restrictions on the right of gun ownership is now so much part of the political landscape that shares in gunmakers rose at the news of the massacre. The two tragedies in Puerto Rico and Las Vegas are dreadful in themselves, but taken together they suggest a systematic weakness in American democracy which is more threatening than either.
Law enforcement officials have yet to confirm what kind of firearms Stephen Paddock used to shoot from his Mandalay Bay hotel room into a crowd of people at a country music festival in Las Vegas, killing at least 59 people, though reports suggested he had at least 19 guns, including rifles, and explosives.
The rapid pace of the gunfire suggested that the shooter was using either a fully automatic weapon, tightly restricted under US law, or that he had attached a device to a semi-automatic gun to make it fire more continuously, said Massad Ayoob, a firearms expert, instructor and author. ¡°It¡¯s faster than almost any human being is going to be able to pull a trigger on a semi-automatic,¡± Ayoob said.
Fully automatic weapons, which fire multiple rounds of ammunition from a single pull of the trigger, are strictly regulated, taxed and tracked under US law. This makes them expensive collectors¡¯ items, and comparatively rarely used in crimes. Semi-automatic rifles, in contrast, which fire only one round of ammunition with each pull of the trigger, are widely available.
Unlike some states, Nevada, which has laws generally friendly to gun owners, does not ban the sale of ¡°assault weapons¡± ? semi-automatic civilian guns built to resemble military weapons.
From listening to the footage of the attack, Ayoob said that the gunshots ¡°did not sound as consistent¡± as he would typically expect from a fully automatic M-16 or AK-47. ¡°The pace of fire is a little bit erratic. At one point it¡¯s slower than it is at another point.¡±
Paddock could have used a Hellfire or a bump-fire device, which attach to normal semi-automatic rifles and allow them to fire more rapidly, Ayoob said. These devices are legal, but rarely used by serious shooters, he said.
¡°It¡¯s hard to shoot accurately with them, and serious shooters want accuracy,¡± he said. He called them ¡°not terribly popular¡± and ¡°something a gun geek would want¡±.
For the Las Vegas shooter, though, the accuracy of these devices would not have mattered, since he was ¡°hosing a two-acre area with 30,000 targets,¡± nearly every shot he fired would have hit someone.
On its website, Bump Fire Systems advertises the device as permitting ¡°simulated full-auto firing¡± that is ¡°absolutely legal¡±. It sells Bump Fire stocks for $99.99.
The Hellfire system uses a hand-operated crank to hit the trigger of the gun more rapidly than a person could fire it, Ayoob said, which could explain apparent changes in the pace of the fire.
Ayoob said he knew of only one previous incident in which a legally owned fully automatic gun was used in a murder. When fully automatic guns do show up in crimes, they have often been stolen, he said.
Semi-automatic weapons patterned to look like fully automatic M-16s have been a political flashpoint for decades, with Democrats arguing that these guns should be banned, and gun rights advocates arguing that semi-automatic weapons such as the AR-15 are no more dangerous than semi-automatic hunting rifles, which are not politically controversial.
The wide availability of large-capacity ammunition magazines, which allow shooters to fire dozens of rounds of ammunition without reloading, has also been a political battleground.
For 10 years, under the 1994 federal assault weapon ban, Congress did limit the production and sale of certain kinds of semi-automatic rifles, as well as higher-capacity ammunition magazines. Congress allowed the ban to expire in 2004, though some states do have their own assault weapons bans still in place. The 1994 law was written in a way that allowed gun manufacturers to market and sell very similar military-style guns with only a few tweaks to make them ban-compliant. The ban also grandfathered in as legal guns and ammunition in banned categories that Americans had already owned.
Following previous mass shootings, some Democrats have argued that Congress should reinstate a broader ban on semi-automatic rifles styled after military weapons. A justice department-funded evaluation of the ban found no clear evidence that it had reduced violence, and concluded that the live-saving effects of even a much stricter ban ¡°are likely to be small at best and perhaps too small for reliable measurement¡±.
Most gun murders in the United States are committed with ordinary handguns. Rifles of any kind were used in only about 3.5% of firearms murders from 2010 to 2014, according to a Guardian analysis of FBI data.
Despite rapid gentrification, the realities of routine gang violence and its cost remain vivid in the Crown Heights area of Brooklyn, New York.
So it was perhaps unwise for Becca Brennan, a 31-year-old former corporate tax attorney from Toronto, to use the totems of thug life to promote Summerhill, her new ¡°boozy sandwich shop¡± in a traditionally Jewish and West Indian neighbourhood.A recent press release and Instagram post from the restaurant prompted widespread anger among local residents, when it advertised one of Summerhill¡¯s cocktails beside a ¡°bullet hole-ridden wall¡± ? remnants of ¡°a rumoured backroom illegal gun shop¡±.
¡°Yes, that bullet hole-ridden wall was originally there and, yes, we¡¯re keeping it,¡± the release claimed.
New York culture publication, The Gothamist, first drew attention to the press release. Among other highlights, Summerhill advertised Forty Ounce Rose, a brand of wine bottled to recall a 40-oz bottle of malt liquor. In an area that was until recently subject to periodic gun battles between the Lincoln and Bergen Family gangs, the post was immediately criticised for its insensitivity.
¡°It¡¯s like you¡¯re mimicking people¡¯s shortcomings,¡± says local business owner Tracy Reid, who runs a a store selling ethnic clothing opposite the bar. ¡°I would gladly have told her she was touching on some very sensitive issues. This community is trying hard to rid itself of the stigma that comes along with the violence.¡±
Local carpenter Kareem Smith had been watching the enterprise set up from the stoop outside his cousin¡¯s barber shop. ¡°When you come a neighbourhood at least be nice,¡± Smith said. ¡°It was a bad a statement and wasn¡¯t too smart for her business. I didn¡¯t see nobody in there Friday or Saturday night, so it definitely wasn¡¯t a successful move.¡±
On a recent visit to the beleaguered venue, a Summerhill barman described the offending ¡°bullet holes¡± as anchor holes for the fridges that had been there, and in a later statement to the Guardian, Brennan acknowledged the error of the Instagram post, saying: ¡°I deeply apologise for any offence that my recent comments might have caused,¡± adding: ¡°The restaurant decor is not intended to make light of any aspect of Crown Heights, or its history.¡±
The controversy is only the latest in a procession of conflicts around the issue of gentrification, in cases where new ventures have been set up without a careful reading of the surrounding environment and history.
Last year, African-American residents objected to a new bar being named after the area¡¯s 19th century name, Crow Hill. ¡°Crow¡±, critics said, was used as a derogatory or racist term. While owner Dan Wilby initially resisted the criticism, he ultimately acceded to pressure and changed the bar¡¯s name from Crow Bar to Franklin 820.
The pressures of gentrification are spreading ever outwards ? to Harlem, Long Island City, Bushwick, Astoria, Gowanus. Three years ago, filmmaker Spike Lee launched an invective-laced tirade against the transformation of his home-turf, the now highly gentrified Fort Greene.¡°I grew up here in New York. It¡¯s changed. And why does it take an influx of white New Yorkers in the south Bronx, in Harlem, in Bed Stuy, in Crown Heights for the facilities to get better? The garbage wasn¡¯t picked up every motherfuckin¡¯ day when I was living in 165 Washington Park. The police weren¡¯t around. When you see white mothers pushing their babies in strollers, three o¡¯clock in the morning on 125th Street, that must tell you something.¡±
In August 1991, Crown Heights saw three days of rioting between black residents and Orthodox Jews. Now, new bars and coffee shops populate the area, the typical outposts of gentrification, but empty storefronts also pepper the streets. Local property agents say small businesses have been forced to close due to rising rents. At the same time, business owners say they have seen trade decline because their traditional customers are moving away.
According to DNAInfo analysis, the postal code covering parts of neighbouring Bedford-Stuyvesant and Crown Heights has seen some of the highest influxes of high-income renters in the city. Between 2000 and 2010, the white population nearly doubled, to 16%.
The community tension is also being felt by new residents coming in. Photographic assistant Christopher Garcia recently arrived from Portland, Oregon. Graffiti opposite his apartment block reads: ¡°No Gentrification.¡±
¡°I honestly feel bad about it and I recognise what gentrification is. When I got here, I immediately felt, ¡®Damn, this kinda sucks¡¯, and I¡¯m part of it.¡±
Some have suggested Summerhill¡¯s owners should make amends for failing to engage with the community, as other bars and restaurants have done. ¡°It¡¯s not too late to amend,¡± said Koran Wong, at the adjacent property letting agents. ¡°I don¡¯t think it was intentionally malicious. She should do something in the community to show she¡¯s ready to fix it. Have a block party or some community out-reach.¡±But Natherlene Bolden, a founding member of the Crown Heights Tenants Union and one of those leading last week¡¯s protests, said she for one would not accept Brennan¡¯s apology. ¡°She¡¯s making fun and money out of us. She¡¯s saying, ¡®I don¡¯t care how you feel. I¡¯ll come into you neighbourhood, open up a bar and make money off your pain while you¡¯re still here¡¯.¡±
¡°We knew [about gentrification] but it never used to be so blatant. She put it in our face, now it¡¯s our turn to react.¡±
Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter and Facebook to join the discussion, and explore our archive here
The victim of a politically charged shooting at a public speech by Milo Yiannopoulos in Seattle is calling for dialogue and ¡°restorative justice¡± rather than criminal charges.
The victim, whose attorney asked that he not be identified by name, was shot in the stomach while protesting at a speech by the rightwing provocateur at the University of Washington on Friday night. He remains in the hospital and has undergone multiple surgeries, his attorney, Sarah Lippek, said on Tuesday.
The shooter was a Trump supporter who sent a Facebook message to Yiannopoulos asking for an autograph while waiting in line for the controversial event, according to the Seattle Times.
The shooter turned himself into University of Washington police on Friday night but was released ¡°in consultation with the prosecuting attorney¡¯s office¡± and ¡°pending further investigation¡±, according to police.
UW police major Steve Rittereiser declined to provide an update on the investigation but said two suspects had ¡°presented themselves to us at the police station¡±. The prosecutors¡¯ office recommended that police release them, he said.
The investigation is ongoing, but Rittereiser said ¡°there were no outstanding suspects in this case¡± and that the release of the suspects ¡°did not pose any danger to the campus community¡±.
The release of the shooter has prompted consternation among some anti-Trump activists, who see a double standard in how leftwing protesters are treated by police. But the victim does not want to see charges filed.
¡°My client isn¡¯t interested in using the apparatus of the state to punish the individual,¡± Lippek said. ¡°He¡¯d like to engage in dialogue and a restorative justice process.¡±
The shooting took place during a confrontation between hundreds of protesters and attendees of the Yiannopoulos speech. The Breitbart editor is on a speaking tour of college campuses, and his appearances have been a target of protest by students who object to his racist and transphobic rhetoric.
The event was hosted by the University of Washington College Republicans. The group did not respond to queries from the Guardian, but condemned the protesters as ¡°pseudo-terrorism that guises itself as justice¡± in a Facebook post.
The victim is a member of the Industrial Workers of the World, a leftwing union, who attended the protest ¡°to oppose Milo¡¯s hateful speech¡±, according to a statement from the IWW. The union said that the victim is a 34-year-old man and ¡°long-time anti-racist and anti-fascist activist¡± who was ¡°unarmed and attempting to de-escalate conflict¡± when he was shot.
¡°We are deeply saddened by the attack on our friend. We are saddened but not surprised that the police released the attacker so swiftly,¡± the IWW said in a statement.
A crowdfunding campaign for his medical bills has raised more than $45,000.
Malala Yousafzai, the teenage girl flown to Britain for treatment after being shot in the head by Taliban gunmen in Pakistan, has the potential to make "pretty much a full recovery", her doctors have said.
She is able to stand with help and is writing notes, and although the bullet grazed her brain she has not shown "any deficit in terms of function", doctors at Queen Elizabeth hospital in Birmingham said on Friday.
She was "not out of the woods but is doing very well", said Dr Dave Rosser, medical director of the University Hospitals Birmingham NHS foundation trust.
Malala, whose age was given as 15 by the hospital, and not 14 as previously reported, was shot 10 days ago on her school bus after promoting the education of girls and criticising Taliban militants.
Initially treated by neurosurgeons at a Pakistani military hospital before being flown to the UK on Monday, she awoke from a medically induced coma on Tuesday afternoon and reportedly asked: "Which country am I in?"
The bullet, fired at point-blank range, struck just above the back of the left eye, went down through the side of her jaw, damaging the skull and the jaw joint on the left side, went through the neck and lodged in the tissues above the shoulder blade. Shock waves from the bullet shattered the thinnest bone of the skull and fragments were driven into the brain.
"The bullet grazed the edge of her brain," Rosser said. "Certainly if you're talking a couple of inches more central, then it's almost certainly an unsurvivable injury."
Doctors say she has memory but they have not talked to her about the shooting. "From a lot of work we have done with our military casualties we know that reminding people of traumatic events at this stage increases the potential for psychological problems later, so we wouldn't do that," Rosser said.
He said Malala was aware of her surroundings, and though she couldn't talk because she had a tracheotomy tube, she had given permission for medical details to be revealed, and wanted to thank everyone for their support.
She was still showing some signs of infection, related to the bullet track, but "she was standing with some help for the first time this morning. She is communicating very freely. She is writing. She has a tracheotomy tube because her airway was swollen by the passing of the bullet, so she is not able to talk, though we have no reason to believe she won't be able to talk once this tube is out, which may be in the next few days."
The specialist doctors, who have expertise in treating soldiers with gunshot injuries flown back from Afghanistan, said it was a "fluid situation" and Malala had suffered "a very, very grave injury". She will need a couple of weeks to rehabilitate before her skull will need to be reconstructed and work may be carried out on her jaw.
Rosser said it was too early to say whether there would be "any subtle intellectual or memory deficit down the line". But in terms of function, "she is able to understand, she has some memory, I am led to believe, she is able to stand, she's got motor control, she's able to write. It certainly would be over-optimistic to say that there is not going to be any further problems, but it is possible she will make a smooth recovery. It's impossible to tell."
He said the hospital was trying to arrange for Malala to listen to her father, who remains in Pakistan, on the phone, though she would not be able to speak to him because of the tube. Hospital staff were communicating with her in Urdu, though it was clear she understood English.
"She is keen that people share the details. She is also keen that I thank people for their support and their interest. She is obviously aware of the amount of support and interest this has generated around the world. She is keen to thank people for that," Rosser said.
Malala was shot along with two classmates as they made their way home from school in north-west Pakistan, in what the foreign secretary, William Hague, described as a "barbaric attack".
Accident and emergency departments in hospitals will be expected to contact police when patients are treated for stab wounds in the same way that they already have to report gunshot wounds, the government has confirmed.
Currently doctors are only compelled to report bullet wounds to the police.
But amid fears that many knife crimes go unreported, the home secretary, Jacqui Smith, told Channel 4 last night said that doctors will be bound to report any serious wounding of patients they treat in the future.
Such a move would give police and the government a clearer idea of the problem as well as improving multi-agency responses to knife crime.
Speaking on Channel 4 last night, Smith said: "That's where we're moving towards in my view and we're starting work, particularly in the south-east where we're looking at that¡¦ I think it's pretty unlikely that we would find ourselves in a position where we didn't expect hospitals to be routinely sharing that information with police and others locally."
The British Medical Association has already provided guidance to doctors and GPs on this issue, which includes a recommendation that A&E staff report serious wounding to the police, including knife and gun-shot wounds, as well as advice about disclosures in the public interest, with a focus on serious crimes.
But it insists there should be an "element of flexibility" in reporting to police.
A BMA spokesman said: "Doctors are very willing to cooperate with the police to tackle knife crime. However, doctors do not want to be compelled to report all knife wounds and therefore breach patient confidentiality.
"There has to be an element of flexibility which would allow doctors to act in their patients' best interests while protecting the public at large."
A government action plan on tackling violence published earlier this year recommended that all serious wounding be reported to the police ? a view echoed last night by the Street Weapons Commission set up by Channel 4 and chaired by Cherie Booth.
Ian Johnston, president of the Chief Superintendents' Association, told the Radio 4 Today programme earlier today that although stab wound victims may be reluctant to discuss the attack, it would give police "a better view of the scale of the problem in this country". "I think this has to be handled delicately," he said.
Also speaking on Today, a head of a London emergency department echoed the BMA's call for a balance to be struck between patient confidentiality and disclosing information of interest to the public.
Tunji Lasoye, of Kings College Hospital, said: "It would require a careful analysis to come up with something that works in the interest of the public and patients, but it is not something that is not do-able. It is something we need to look at carefully and make sure that reporting is accurate."
Lasoye said the number of knife wounds seen by his department had risen in the past four years, while the age range of victims had "dropped significantly". "We now see children as young as 10," he said.
Reeva Steenkamp was standing in a toilet cubicle and facing the closed door when she was hit in the right hip by the first of four hollow-point bullets fired at her by Oscar Pistorius, a police ballistics expert testified on Wednesday at the double-amputee Olympic runner's murder trial.
Steenkamp then fell back on to a magazine holder in the cubicle and was struck in the right arm and head by the last two shots fired by Pistorius with his 9mm pistol through the door. Pistorius's girlfriend crossed her arms over her head to protect herself, Captain Christian Mangena said, when she was hit in the arm and head. He testified that he believed the second bullet shot missed Steenkamp and ricocheted off a wall inside the cubicle and broke into fragments, which caused bruising on her back.
Mangena concluded through his analysis of the shooting scene and wounds on Steenkamp's body from postmortem photographs that one of the final two bullets went through Steenkamp's left hand before penetrating her skull as she held it over her head. The policeman said he couldn't determine the order of the last two shots.
Pistorius, 27, is charged with premeditated murder over Steenkamp's shooting death on 14 February last year and faces 25 years to life in prison if convicted. He says he shot Steenkamp, 29, by mistake through a locked door in his bathroom because he thought she was a dangerous nighttime intruder.
Pistorius says Steenkamp went to use the toilet during the night without him knowing, but prosecutors maintain he killed her after a loud argument that caused her to possibly flee and hide in the toilet area.
As Mangena threw his hands up to cover his head in court and replicate the defensive position he said Steenkamp took as the last shots were fired, Pistorius put his fingers in his ears in an apparent attempt to block out the testimony.
June Steenkamp, Reeva's mother, also was in the courtroom and occasionally glanced at photos of the bloody scene of her daughter's shooting before looking away.
Police ballistics expert Mangena said the bullet that struck Steenkamp's skull broke into two fragments, one of which exited her head and struck the wall behind her. The first shot into the right hip broke Steenkamp's hip bone, Mangena said.
"I'm of the opinion that after this wound was inflicted, my lady, she dropped immediately," Mangena said, addressing the judge in court under questioning from prosecutor Gerrie Nel. Steenkamp slumped into a "seated or semi-seated position" on top of the magazine rack in the cubicle, where she was hit another two times, he said.
"She ended up with her head on top of the toilet seat, and the lower part of her body on the rack, Mangena said.
Pistorius fired from a distance of at least 60cm and no further than a wall behind him, about three metres away, Mangena said. Mangena also described the impact of the type of bullets in Pistorius's gun, which were designed to cause maximum damage, he said.
"It hits the target, it opens up, it creates six talons, and these talons are sharp," Mangena said. "It cuts through the organs of a human being."
He noted the Black Talon brand of ammunition was often used for self-defence because while it caused significant damage to a human target, it was less likely to penetrate the first target and hit other people.
Pistorius's lawyer, Barry Roux, cross-examined Mangena and said the defence's own forensic and ballistic experts would challenge the policeman's testimony regarding the sequence of the shots. Roux also said defence experts had recovered a bullet and fragments from the toilet bowl that police missed. Mangena said he was aware of that.
Mangena testified he conducted shooting tests to try to pinpoint the location from which the bullets were fired by Pistorius in the bathroom, based on where cartridge cases were found. However, in his tests, he said, the cases fell at different angles. He also noted that the cartridge cases at the scene of Steenkamp's shooting could have been "moved or kicked around" during the investigation.
He said Pistorius was probably on his stumps when he fired, supporting the athlete's statement that he was not wearing his prosthetic limbs when he opened fire.
Prosecutor Nel also asked Mangena to comment on a 2012 incident in which Pistorius allegedly fired his gun out of the sunroof of a moving car. The athlete faces a firearms charge in that case, as well as two other firearms-related charges.
Mangena said firing a shot in such circumstances was dangerous.
The bullet leaves the barrel at around 280 metres a second, and will travel upwards, then stop and fall to the ground under the force of gravity and wind deflection, he said."The bullet can still kill a person," Mangena said.
The victim of a miscarriage of justice has praised the students who investigated his case, after a historic ruling saw his murder conviction overturned on appeal thanks to the work of a team lead by Cardiff University.
Dwaine George, now aged 30, was jailed for life in 2002 for the shooting of 18-year-old Daniel Dale in Manchester, and served 12 years behind bars on a life sentence before being freed last year. But on Tuesday top judges overturned his conviction, and praised the ¡°diligent¡± work of law students who helped provide the evidence which they deemed made the conviction ¡°no longer safe¡±.
George, who has always maintained his innocence, was helped by law students at Cardiff University working under the university¡¯s Innocence Project, which investigates potential miscarriages of justice. Quashing his conviction today, one of the most senior judges in the country Sir Brian Leveson, said the it was ¡°no longer safe¡± and praised ¡°the work of the Innocence Project and Pro Bono Unit at Cardiff Law School, which took up the appellant¡¯s case and pursued it so diligently¡±. George has always denied being involved with the 2001 killing of Dale, who was gunned down in Manchester days before he had been due to give evidence at Manchester crown court about the killing of his best friend. Paul Ward, 16, had been stabbed to death in a street attack in the city earlier in the year.
The prosecution argued that George ? who denied all involvement ? and another man, Ryan Brown, had used a Walther PPK self-loading pistol to kill Dale. They presented evidence of a very small amount of gunshot residue found on a black Henri Lloyd hooded jacket found under the stairs at George¡¯s home.
George¡¯s first appeal failed in 2004, but the Criminal Cases Review Commission (CCRC) referred the murder conviction to the court of appeal for a second time. The current appeal focused on new guidelines which cast doubt on using small particles of gunshot residue as evidence. Students contacted Dennis McGuire, a US-based gunshot residue expert, who provided the basis for the students¡¯ technical submissions. In his judgment, made with Mr Justice Green and Mr Justice Goss, Leveson pointed to new guidelines on firearms residue issued by the Forensic Science Service (FSS) in 2006, two years after George¡¯s conviction. If the new guidelines were followed ¡°the number and type of particles of residue found on the coat were so small so as to be at or near the level at which they could not be considered to have evidential value,¡± according to the judgment. If the judge at the original trial had access to the new guidelines his directions to the jury ¡°would have been couched in terms of much greater circumspection and caution,¡± it added.
In a statement George thanked students, professors and pro-bono lawyers for securing the overturning of his conviction, ¡°First and foremost, my thoughts go out to Daniel Dale¡¯s family. He lost his life in this tragic event and I always said I wasn¡¯t responsible for that,¡± he said. ¡°Today I have got the result I wanted ? I have lost a lot of my life that I can¡¯t get back, but I just want to get on with my life now. I hope the Cardiff Innocence Project will get all the recognition it deserves for this. I want to thank all those who helped me ? the students and staff at Cardiff, my solicitor David McCorkle, James Wood QC and Tunde Okewale from Doughty Street Chambers¡±.
Thirty current and former students of Cardiff attended George¡¯s appeal on 6 November to witness the students¡¯ investigative work presented by barristers to a panel of appeal court judges. The university is one of a number of higher education institutions that work on cases of potential miscarriages of justice. Prof Julie Price, who runs the Cardiff project with Dr Dennis Eady, said university students had worked for ¡°hundreds of hours¡± on the case over a four year period and the fact that it was the first case to be overturned with the help of an innocence project in nine years exposed serious flaws in the appeal process. But she said she was not ¡°pleased¡± at the outcome. ¡°We hope this case will draw attention to the real problems with the appeal project, but are very conscious that a young man was killed and his family will have to go through more suffering and that has to dominate our thoughts,¡± she said.
George¡¯s barrister James Wood QC said: ¡°The work of the Innocence Project of Cardiff University essentially contributed magnificently towards overturning this abiding miscarriage of justice. Dwaine George had been convicted upon flawed voice identification evidence, and flawed microscopically minuscule gunshot residue on an item of clothing seized from his cellar, which science now discloses could not bear the burden of his conviction. Dwaine protested his innocence throughout his long imprisonment and obtained a degree whilst incarcerated. He can now seek to put his life together again as an innocent man wholly vindicated by this judgment.¡±
Dale¡¯s mother said she had been left ¡°feeling sick¡± at the decision to quash George¡¯s conviction. ¡°There is no appeal available for my son¡¯s life,¡± Lynn Hayes told the Manchester Evening News. ¡°No amount of time will ever fix the heartbreak that my family continue to suffer each and everyday.¡±
? This article was amended on 30 April 2015 to correct the name in the picture caption.
Footage released by the Metropolitan police shows three men walking along Tulse Hill in Brixton, south London, on Sunday 7 February before a passing moped approaches them. The rear passenger jumps off the moped. The three men start running and the moped passenger chases them while firing a weapon. One man suffered a gunshot wound to the thigh
It was cold, clinical, scientific testimony that finally robbed Oscar Pistorius of his composure.
A pathologist's report from the witness stand of the austere courtroom, detailing the devastating impact of three hollow tipped bullets on the body of his girlfriend Reeva Steenkamp, was punctuated by the gutteral sounds of the sporting celebrity gagging and vomiting repeatedly into a bucket.
While Pistorius has mostly retained his self-possession as a succession of neighbours and an ex-girlfriend gave evidence against him, it was the dry, technical language of professor Gert Saayman that hit him hardest. He was bent double in the dock, hands on his ears as if trying to block out the words, his body in visceral pain and violently sick.
The scene unfolded on the sixth day of the "blockbuster trial" in Pretoria where the testimony was deemed so graphic that judge Thokozile Masipa banned live coverage of it on radio, television, Twitter and blogs.
Saayman was responsible for the post-mortem on Steenkamp, a 29-year-old model, after she was killed on Valentine's day last year in what Pistorius claims was an accident. Based on fragments found in Steenkamp's skull, the forensic pathologist said Pistorius had used an expanding bullet designed to cause maximum tissue damage when he opened fire through a locked toilet door.
Saayman also gave his opinion on how long before she died Steenkamp last ate by the food contents in her stomach. He estimated that it would not have been more than two hours before she died. That appeared to contradict Pistorius's version that suggests the couple had eaten and were in bed by 10pm. Steenkamp was shot after 3am.
The "black talon" or "ranger" ammunition, made by US-based firm Winchester, is designed to "open up, flatten out and mushroom when striking human tissue", Saayman said. "The usual result is it folds out like the petals of flower. They were specifically designed by the manufacturer to have very sharp jagged edges. This projectile was designed to cause maximum damage. It has a black metal jacket.
"If a surgeon were to operate on a patient shot in this nature you have to be careful as you can easily cut yourself on these edges."According to Saayman, Steenkamp suffered bullet wounds in her head, hip and elbow and any could have caused her death because of the extent of the bleeding. She also received injuries from bullet fragments, wood splinters from the door and pieces of her own bone.
A bullet that hit the right side of Steenkamp's head fractured her skull and entered her brain. She would have lost consciousness and "the deceased probably didn't breathe more than a few times after sustaining this wound", Saayman said. "The wound to the head was incapacitating and probably almost instantly fatal."
The bullet wound above Steenkamp's right elbow shattered her upper arm and she would not have been able to use it if she had survived. The hip wound would have affected her balance. "The chances of one surviving such an injury... I would put it off the top of my head at 50-50," the pathologist told the court.
He also described exit wounds caused by the bullets and other abrasions and discolouration of the skin, consistent with the impact of a bullet fired through a wooden object such as a door. Steenkamp was wearing a pair of sports shorts with a Nike logo, a former sponsor of Pistorius and a black undershirt when she was shot, he said.
Saayman stood for his testimony, referring to photographs that were not shown to the gallery and often citing number codes. Yet it drove Pistorius, a double-amputee known as the "blade runner", over the edge. The 27-year-old bowed his head and pressed it against the dock's inner wooden wall, weeping and clasping his hands behind his neck and clutching a white handkerchief. A blue metal bucket was placed in the dock and he threw up several times.
At one stage the trial was adjourned as defence counsel Barry Roux announced his client had been sick. Pistorius's sister, Aimee, joined him in the dock and embraced him for long minutes, but he appeared inconsolable, as if curling into a ball.
Later a reference to a photo showing the "smearing and scattering of tissue including bony elements," made Pistorius rock back and forth and retch.Masipa asked if Roux could do anything to help his client and if Pistorius was able to follow proceedings. Roux replied: "My lady, he's not fine but he's not going to be fine. He's having some difficulty. He's very emotional but it's not going to change."
Roux then approached Pistorius who indicated that the testimony should continue despite his anguish. A court official lifted the dock microphone away from Pistorius but the ongoing sounds of distress were impossible to ignore. Meanwhile, in the public gallery, friends of Steenkamp were also in tears.After court adjourned for the day, Pistorius sat for a few minutes with his hands over his ears and his body heaving and bent forward as his brother held a hand on his back.
Earlier, prosecutor Gerrie Nel, supported by Roux, said Saayman's testimony would have an explicitly graphic nature and should not be shown around the world. Masipa announced a ban on live audio and video broadcasting, and extended the order to live reporting on social media. "Twitter is not allowed. Blogging is not allowed," said Masipa, though subsequent reporting was permitted.
Louisiana¡¯s head of police said there was no evidence that the father of a boy killed in a police encounter was armed when shots were fired on Tuesday night.
During a press conference on Thursday, Colonel Michael Edmonson also said there was some video of the shooting into a car in Marksville, Louisiana, but that officials have not had a chance to review it.
The boy, Jeremy Mardis, was a passenger in the car that his father Chris Few was driving. Police said Few was evading the police after they tried to serve a warrant, and officers began shooting when Few reached a dead end and began backing into the officers, according to the AP.
Mardis was ¡°caught in the line of fire¡± and killed by multiple gunshot wounds to the head and torso, Avoyelles Parish coroner Dr LJ Mayeux said. Mayeux previously told the Guardian it was ¡°highly likely¡± Mardis was killed by police, although police hedged from confirming who was responsible for Mardis¡¯s death. Few is in critical but stable condition.
State police said the officers fired at Few¡¯s car when he backed his car toward the officers. But the orange spray paint on the dead-end road that marks the location and orientation of each car seems to show that Few¡¯s car sat perpendicular to the officers¡¯ cars, and that the volley of bullets entered through the driver¡¯s side. A spray of glass on the ground appears to have been blown outward from the passenger¡¯s side.
Willie Barton, who lives nearby, came out of his house when he heard the sirens and saw three stopped police cars ? two black-and-white, and one dark blue ? facing the little SUV.
Barton paced off the distance between the cars, and examined the paint that apparently marked locations of bullet casings.
¡°I don¡¯t see why they had to shoot him, not knowing if there was anyone else in the car,¡± he said. ¡°They aren¡¯t supposed to do that.¡±
The site of the pursuit and shooting is residential, and as Barton watched, he said, neighbors in every direction stepped outside to see what was happening.
Seconds before the shooting, his common-law wife, Marie Lonzo, turned at the corner where Taensas Street meets Martin Luther King, Jr Drive.
She saw a small SUV, a tiny jeep-like car, coming toward her, and behind it police cars in both lanes. She pulled to the side of the road to avoid a collision with the black-and-white cars, and saw the whole procession come to a stop at the corner behind her.
¡°It was close,¡± she said.
The officers involved in Monday¡¯s pursuit were ward marshals, local law enforcement officials that primarily serve warrants and subpoenas. Ward marshals, also known as city marshals, operate independently from the Marksville police department, although some local police officers work second jobs as ward marshals, Marksville¡¯s mayor, John Lemoine, told the Guardian. The ward marshal involved in Monday¡¯s shooting is believed to be an off-duty Marksville police officer, according to Clyde Benson, a Marksville councilman and police commissioner.
Floyd Voinche, the ward marshal for Ward 2 and the head of the agency involved in Monday¡¯s shooting, could not be reached for comment. Voinche is an elected official and his office operates independently.
Steve Martel, the chief deputy of the Avoyelles Parish sheriff¡¯s department, said that marshals have law enforcement authority but do not always exercise it.
¡°Their police function is really negligible,¡± Martel said. ¡°They¡¯re basically there as a civil function but they also have law enforcement authority as they do in Ward 2.¡±
Three Israelis have been killed in a gun attack by a Palestinian assailant at a settlement outside Jerusalem.
Police said the attacker arrived at a rear entrance to the Har Adar settlement at about 7am as security guards were opening a gate to admit Palestinian labourers with permits.When security guards became suspicious, the individual pulled out a pistol hidden under his shirt and opened fire, fatally wounding three Israelis ? a policeman and two civilian security guards ? before he was shot and killed.
The victims were named as 20-year-old police sergeant Solomon Gavriya and security guards Youssef Ottman and Or Arish, both 25.
Authorities identified the gunman as 37-year-old Nimr Mahmoud Ahmed Jamal from the nearby village of Beit Surik. Israeli security services said he had ¡°significant personal and family problems, including those regarding family violence¡± and that his wife had fled to Jordan several weeks ago.
The attacker held a work permit for the settlements. Permits are issued only after security vetting.
Shay Retter, the head of Har Adar¡¯s security committee, said between 100 and 150 Palestinian labourers typically enter the community each day for work.
Moshir Abu Katish, a paramedic volunteer who lives in the neighbouring Arab-Israeli town of Abu Gosh, described the aftermath of the attack to the Jerusalem Post.
¡°I ran to treat the injured people who were suffering from gunshot wounds to their upper bodies. Unfortunately, the three more seriously injured people in the attack were pronounced dead at the scene. A fourth person who was injured we treated at the scene before he was transported to the hospital for further treatment and observation,¡± he said.
The incident, at a settlement north-west of Jerusalem that lies near several Palestinian villages, came as the US envoy, Jason Greenblatt, was in the city for talks on relaunching the moribund Middle East peace process.
A wave of unrest that broke out two years ago has largely subsided in recent months. Since October 2015, at least 295 Palestinians or Arab Israelis, 50 Israelis, two Americans, two Jordanians, an Eritrean, a Sudanese and a Briton have been killed, according to the AFP.
Israeli authorities say that most of the Palestinians killed were carrying out knife, gun or car-ramming attacks. Others were shot dead in protests and clashes, while some were killed in Israeli airstrikes on the Gaza Strip.
Jahangir Khan was shot in the head and neck outside his home in High Wycombe, just before 6am yesterday, after a dispute with other youths.
His brothers, Shokat and Azad, both 21, received arm, chest and neck injuries after chasing the boy's attackers down an alley. The gunmen made their escape by car.
Police said the attack took place after a row, a few hours earlier, between the family and another group of youths.
Mushtaq Khan, a father of eight, bundled his sons into a car immediately after the shooting and took them to Wycombe general hospital. The schoolboy was later transferred to a specialist unit at the John Radcliffe hospital in Oxford, where his condition yesterday was described as "very serious", and deteriorating.
"His condition does not look good and we are very concerned for his welfare," said Detective Superintendent Trevor Davies, who is leading the investigation for Thames Valley police.
His brothers' injuries were described as "serious but not life threatening". Last night their condition was stable.
A long curved sword was also found at the scene, which yesterday was sealed off and being examined by dozens of forensic officers.
Det Supt Davies said an altercation had taken place outside the house between 2am and 3am. A number of men returned to the house at around 6am, he said, when the schoolboy was attacked. Two Asian men are being sought .
"We have not been able to establish a motive as yet and we need that to give the investigation some direction," he said, adding: "We don't want people running around the streets of High Wycombe discharging firearms."
Police sealed off the area and neighbours wanting to leave the street were escorted by armed officers wearing flak jackets. One neighbour, who did not want to be named, said: "We were awoken with a jolt by this loud bang, and then we heard terrible screams. I looked out the window and saw this little boy lying in the middle of the road."
Mohammed Saleem, another neighbour, said he had heard three shots, one on its own followed by two others in quick succession.
NOOKS AND CRANNIES
What happens to a bullet that is fired vertically into the air? Has anybody died as a result? It keeps going until it runs out of kinetic energy then it starts to fall to earth. There have been many cases of injury from falling bullets, particularly in the Middle East where firing into the air is a common pastime. In the Philippines, people are frequently killed by falling bullets, especially around election time when firing into the air is, for some reason, a popular pastime. It comes back down at almost the same speed at which it was fired - "almost" because on descent it accelerates to the point at which the surrounding air prevents any further acceleration. But the great height the bullet reaches means that if its trajectory is not perfectly vertical, it may come back down a great distance away. A bullet will accelerate until it leaves the barrel, typically around Mach 3. It will then immediately start decelerating at slightly more than 10 metres per second per second - gravity and air resistance will slow it down. At some point high in the air (work it out yourself) the bullet will stop and begin falling. It would reach its terminal velocity of about 30 mph quite quickly and will fall back to earth. Being hit on the head or in the face by a bullet doing 30 mph would be unpleasant but is unlikely to be fatal unless you're very unlucky. The reason it doesn't land at the same speed as it was fired is due to the different forces involved in each stage. There is initially a large explosive force which accelerates the bullet up to a very high speed very quickly. The bullet is then left to gradually decelerate due to the pull of gravity and friction with the air, until it stops. Then, gravity acts as an accelerating force but friction still acts as a decelerating force. When these forces balance, the bullet doesn't accelerate any more but stays at the same speed (the `terminal velocity'). So, a bullet fired from a plane would hit the ground at the same speed as a bullet fired from the ground such that it just reached the plane and then dropped, since friction acts to decelerate the bullet regardless of direction. Otherwise, seagulls would be amongst the most dangerous creatures on Earth. It's a tradition in the Deep South to blast guns off into the air at New Year. It has resulted in death in the crowded New Orleans French Quarter. The Pakistani custom of firing rifles during wedding celebrations has led to a number of tragedies. In the Peshawar region, jubilant cousins blasted away with rented AK-47 assault rifles, accidentally killing the groom's father and postponing the wedding for a 40-day period of mourning. In another incident, shots severed overhead power cables which electrocuted eight guests and set part of the village on fire.Istanbul is on high alert as the hunt for a gunman, who fled after killing 39 people at a nightclub on New Year¡¯s Eve, continues.
President Recep Tayyip Erdo?an vowed in a statement that Turkey would fight terrorism ¡°till the end¡± following the attack at Reina in Istanbul¡¯s upmarket Ortakoy neighbourhood.
¡°Turkey will stand together and not give passage to dirty games of terrorists,¡± he said.
Mehmet Gormez, Turkey¡¯s most senior Muslim cleric, condemned the attack as ¡°savagery¡± and a ¡°massacre that no Muslim conscience can accept¡±.
There was condemnation from around the world as well as inside Turkey. The US State Department described the attack as ¡°heinous¡± and the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said it was ¡°hard to imagine a more cynical crime¡±.
The attack came at the end of a year of terrorist incidents across Europe, including the driving of a truck into a Christmas market in Berlin earlier in December. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, sent her condolences to the victims of the Istanbul attack, saying ¡°terrorists ... have carried out an inhumane and devious attack on people who wanted to celebrate the new year together¡±.
A Downing Street spokesman said Theresa May had written to Erdo?an after the attack to offer her condolences. ¡°She said her thoughts were with the Turkish people after this further devastating terrorist attack, and confirms the UK stands ready to help,¡± No 10 said.
In his new year¡¯s address, Pope Francis said: ¡°Unfortunately, violence has stricken even in this night of good wishes and hope. Pained, I express my closeness to the Turkish people. I pray for the many victims and for the wounded and for the entire nation in mourning.
¡°I ask the Lord to sustain all men of good will to courageously roll up their sleeves to confront the plague of terrorism and this stain of blood that is covering the world with a shadow of fear and a sense of loss.¡±
The gunman entered Reina, a club on the Bosphorus that has long been a favourite of tourists, a little after 1am, shot a police officer and then opened fire inside the club with a Kalashnikov rifle, before fleeing the scene.
Istanbul¡¯s governor, Vasip ?ahin, told reporters: ¡°At 1.15am, a terrorist carrying a long-barrelled weapon martyred the police officer waiting outside, and then martyred another citizen to enter. He then carried out this violent and cruel act by spraying bullets on innocent people who were celebrating the new year.¡±
The interior minister, Suleyman Soylu, said the gunman was still at large, after reports initially said the attacker was killed. Police were deployed around key areas of the city and several roads near the scene of the attack were closed off.
Witnesses described scenes of chaos as revellers attempted to flee, some even throwing themselves into the Bosphorus to escape the gunfire.
Outside ?i?li Etfal hospital, Sinem Uyan©¥k said she had been at the club with her husband, who was wounded in the attack. ¡°Before I could understand what was happening, my husband fell on top me,¡± she told Associated Press. ¡°I had to lift several bodies from on top of me before I could get out. It was frightening.¡± She said her husband¡¯s condition was not serious.
It was unclear how the attacker managed to escape from the club, which is just across the street from a police station. One report suggested he abandoned his weapon and mingled with the crowd outside pretending to be an injured civilian. No group has claimed responsibility for the attack.
Turkey¡¯s prime minister, Binali Y©¥ld©¥r©¥m, said an investigation into the identity of the gunman was ongoing but he was not prepared to share details yet.
There was conflicting information on Sunday evening about the identities of the foreigners who were killed in the attack. Selin Do?an, an opposition politician from Istanbul who toured the hospitals and the morgue at the forensic institute, said the dead included citizens from Saudi Arabia, Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, Tunisia, Kuwait and Israel, as well as a Belgian-Turkish dual national and a Canadian-Iraqi. The Jordanian foreign ministry said three of its citizens were also killed in the attack.
Among the victims was a Tunisian couple and twins from Saudi Arabia. Do?an said the dead all had gunshot wounds and that 11 bodies had been delivered to their families.
Turkey has endured numerous terror attacks over the past year by Islamic State militants and Kurdish separatist groups. Three weeks ago a twin bombing outside the football stadium in the district of Be?ikta? killed 46 people, most of them police officers, two hours after a football match.
The latest attack has again shaken a country that endured a string of high profile bombings, including in the busy Ataturk airport last summer and near the Hagia Sophia mosque, as well as an attempted military coup in July.
Shortly after the nightclub attack, relatives of local staff gathered outside the police cordon to await news of their loved ones. Two men collapsed in tears and sobbed upon receiving news that a relative had died in the attack. Another man who was in the club described a chaotic scene with people rushing for the exits, but was in too much shock to offer a detailed account of the assault.
At the forensic institute in Istanbul, some families gathered to collect the bodies of the victims. Stephanie Deek, a Lebanese woman, said her friend was with her husband at the club when the attack happened.
¡°They were just tourists, married for five months, and they wanted to find the perfect place to spend New Year¡¯s Eve,¡± said Deek.
The husband, a 35-year old Lebanese man called Haykal Musallem, was in the bathroom when the attack began. His wife rushed out of the club, while he apparently attempted to jump into the Bosphorus to flee, but was killed.
¡°I¡¯m feeling so sad,¡± she said. ¡°I can¡¯t even talk or express my feelings.¡±
But there was also anger at what some saw as heightened polarisation and rhetoric in the run-up to the attack. Conservative clerics and media outlets have railed against the sinfulness of new year¡¯s celebrations in recent days.
Tabloid newspapers with deeply religious audiences ran headlines such as: ¡°This is a last warning: do not celebrate¡± and: ¡°Down with your civilisation¡± with images of party-goers next to images of deprivation in Syria, where nearly half a million people have been killed in an ongoing civil war.
The target of the attack prompted some observers to see it as directed against Turkey¡¯s secular character, in the midst of an ongoing struggle to define the republic¡¯s identity.
Akif Hamzacebi, a lawmaker from the Republican People¡¯s party (CHP), described the assault as an ¡°attack on a way of life¡± and and said it was ¡°savage¡±.
¡°The aim is to plant seeds of hatred among society,¡± he said, speaking after visiting the wounded in Istanbul¡¯s ?i?li Etfal hospital. ¡°We do not want to live with the acceptance of terror and the state should teach a lesson to the terrorist organisations.¡±
An influential CHP deputy from Istanbul, Gursel Tekin, said at the hospital: ¡°In the coming days we should be talking about this ? in the last week there were so many messages which can damage our social peace but none of these messages were investigated. Those responsible should resign.¡±
Donald Trump waded into the debate over Chicago¡¯s soaring rates of murder and gun crime on Monday, telling the city¡¯s mayor, Rahm Emanuel, to seek federal help if he is unable to find a solution.
The president-elected tweeted: ¡°Chicago murder rate is record setting - 4,331 shooting victims with 762 murders in 2016. If Mayor can¡¯t do it he must ask for Federal help!¡±Emanuel, who was Barack Obama¡¯s first chief of staff, released a statement that applauded the president-elect for addressing the issue but did not directly address Trump¡¯s suggestion that his city seek federal government help.
¡°As the president-elect knows from his conversation with the mayor, we agree the federal government has a strong role to play in public safety by funding summer jobs and prevention programming for at-risk youth, by holding the criminals who break our gun laws accountable for their crimes, by passing meaningful gun laws, and by building on the partnerships our police have with federal law enforcement,¡± the statement said.
¡°We are heartened he is taking this issue seriously and look forward to working with the new administration on these important efforts.¡±
Trump¡¯s intervention came as Chicago recorded the highest annual number of homicides in more than two decades.
A total of 762 homicides were recorded in the city in 2016 ? more than the figures for New York and Los Angeles combined.
Trump¡¯s comments came hours after Chicago¡¯s gun violence epidemic made national news in a CBS 60 Minutes segment titled ¡°Crisis in Chicago¡±, about a six-day period in which there were 55 shooting victims. Sixteen died from their wounds.
The nation¡¯s third-largest city also saw 1,100 more shooting incidents last year than it did in 2015, according to data released on Sunday by the Chicago police department.
Records kept by the Chicago Tribune put the 2016 tally at 781 homicides. The discrepancy with the Chicago police department¡¯s figure of 762 derives from an accounting methods anomaly ? the CPD does not include homicides on area expressways, police-involved shootings, other homicides in which a person was killed in self-defense, or death investigations.
The statistics underline a story of bloodshed that has put Chicago at the center of a national dialogue about gun violence.
The numbers are staggering, even for those who followed the steady news accounts of weekends ending with dozens of shootings and monthly death tolls that hadn¡¯t been seen in years. The increase in homicides compared to 2015, when 485 were reported, is the largest spike in 60 years.
Police and city officials have lamented the flood of illegal guns into the city, and the crime statistics appeared to support their claims: police recovered 8,300 illegal guns in 2016, a 20% increase from the previous year.
Chicago¡¯s police superintendent, Eddie Johnson, said during a news conference on Sunday that Chicago is among many US cities that have seen a spike in violence, including in attacks on police. He said anger at police, including in the wake of video released that showed a white Chicago officer shooting a black teenager 16 times, has left criminals ¡°emboldened¡± to violent crimes.
He also said it was becoming clearer to criminals that they had little to fear from the criminal justice system.
¡°In Chicago, we just don¡¯t have a deterrent to pick up a gun,¡± he said. ¡°Any time a guy stealing a loaf of bread spends more time pre-trial in jail than a gun offender, something is wrong.¡±
Johnson, who has for months complained about Illinois¡¯ lax gun laws, said he thinks more and more gang members are arming themselves because the price for being caught is small compared to other large cities. He said gang members he had spoken to consider the court system ¡°a joke¡±.
The bulk of the deaths and shooting incidents, which jumped from 2,426 in 2015 to 3,550 last year, occurred in only five of the city¡¯s 22 police districts on the city¡¯s south and west sides, all poor and predominantly black areas where gangs are most active.
Police said the shootings in those areas generally were not random, with more than 80% of the victims having previously been identified by police as more susceptible because of their gang ties or past arrests.
The city has scrambled to address the violence. Emanuel announced last year that 1,000 officers would be added to the police department. At the same time, police officials have been trying to figure out why homicides and shootings ? which began climbing the year before ? suddenly surged.
On Sunday, Johnson said he hoped several initiatives ? including more street cameras in some of the city¡¯s most dangerous neighborhoods, and the expansion of gunshot-detection systems ? would lead to more arrests and drive down the violent crime rate.
Johnson has said several factors have contributed to the increased violence. He noted 2016 was the first full year since the city was forced in November 2015 to release video of the fatal police shooting of Laquan McDonald, the black 17-year-old boy who was shot 16 times by a white police officer.
The video cost former Chicago police superintendent Garry McCarthy his job, sparked major protests around the city, and led to federal and state investigations of the police department.
It also left Johnson with the task of trying to restore public trust in what appeared to be a weakened police force, a perception that was only buttressed by a dramatic drop in the number of arrests in 2016.
The police department has cited several factors for the declining numbers, including a concerted effort not to make minor drug arrests and focus on gun violence. Johnson pointed to gun arrests and gun seizures as evidence that his officers are aggressively fighting crime.
But critics said they had no doubt that officers had become far more reluctant to do their jobs since the McDonald video was released and the officer who killed the teen was charged with murder.
¡°It¡¯s almost like a pull back so they [gangs] can kill each other sort of thing,¡± said the Reverend Marshall Hatch, a prominent minister in one of Chicago¡¯s most dangerous neighborhoods on the west side.
Johnson acknowledged in a recent interview with the Associated Press that officers have become more cautious, in part out of fear of becoming the next ¡°viral video¡±. He also said a state law that took effect last January requiring officers to fill out lengthy contact cards when they stop someone had resulted in fewer stops, because the cards require more paperwork for officers and the cards are ¡°scrutinized¡± by federal judges.
He said those concerns were not lost on criminals.
¡°Criminals watch TV, pay attention to the media,¡± he said. ¡°They see an opportunity to commit nefarious activity.¡±
The Associated Press contributed to this report
My fellow Americans. we are joined together today in sadness, shock and grief. Last night a gunman opened fire on a large crowd at a country music concert in Las Vegas, Nevada. He brutally murdered more than 50 people and wounded hundreds more. It was an act of pure evil. The FBI and the Department of Homeland Security are working closely with local authorities to assist with the investigation and they will provide updates as to the investigation and how it develops.
Erik Kramer, the former Detroit Lions and Chicago Bears quarterback, shot himself on Tuesday night in what his ex-wife said was an apparent suicide attempt.
Kramer, 50, was wounded in the shooting but survived. According to reports, police were called to a motel in Calabasas, California, just north-west of LA. When deputies arrived they found Kramer with a gunshot wound that was described as not life-threatening.
Kramer¡¯s former wife, Marshawn Kramer, told NBC News it was a suicide attempt, and said Kramer suffered from depression that she believes was the result of his time playing in the NFL.
¡°He is a very amazing man, a beautiful soul, but he has suffered depression since he was with the Bears,¡± Marshawn Kramer told NBC. ¡°I can promise you he is not the same man I married.¡±
Kramer played in the NFL between 1987 and 1999, and finished with 31-36 record as a starter. He played in an NFC Championship game for the Lions in 1991, but arguably his peak came in 1995 with the Bears, when he threw for 29 touchdowns and 10 interceptions while leading the team to a 9-7 record.
After he finished playing, he went into sports broadcasting. He worked as an NFL announcer for Fox and currently covers the Bears.
The news comes amid a passionate debate over the effects of head injuries on players who played in the NFL. Former NFL stars Junior Seau and Dave Duerson killed themselves and were posthumously diagnosed with chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a brain condition linked to repeated blows to the head.
The NFL and the NFL Players Association did not immediately return emails seeking comment.
Marshawn and Erik Kramer officially divorced in 2010, after years of problems caused by Erik¡¯s depression, she said. ¡°I know Erik and I would still be together if not for his football injury,¡± she said. It was an amicable split, she said, and they live in the same California city, not far from each other.
At 12.20am and 20 seconds in Utah today Ronnie Lee Gardner became the first American in 14 years to be put to death by firing squad, his heart ripped to pieces by bullets blasted from the rifles of five expert marksmen hidden behind a brick wall.
The state attorney, Mark Shurtleff, tweeted the news. "I just gave the go ahead to Corrections Director to proceed with Gardner's execution," he wrote, adding: "May God grant him the mercy he denied his victims."
Then, with relatives of the condemned man's victims looking on behind bullet-proof glass, he became only the third person to die by firing squad in the US since 1977.
All three took place in this western state, which has long prided itself on its passionate embrace of the gun.
Utah is the only state in the US other than Oklahoma that lists the firing squad as a possible means of execution, offering condemned men the choice between that and the lethal injection.
In April, Gardner chose to die by the gun, telling a judge: "I would like the firing squad, please."
The manner of the execution shocked many across America, with critics claiming it was a throwback to the brutal blood-begets-blood mentality of the frontier era. Demonstrations were held on the steps of the Utah State Capitol building in central Salt Lake City and a prayer vigil was held at the Catholic cathedral.
Gardner ate his last meal of steak, lobster tail, apple pie, vanilla ice cream and 7UP soda on Tuesday, choosing to fast until his death.
The prisoner's extended family of about 20 brothers, sisters, daughters and grandchildren were assembled outside the prison, having strung up dozens of coloured balloons, which they released as soon as news came through of Gardner's death, as a symbol of his soul going up to heaven.
His daughter Brandie told the Guardian that Gardner explained to her why he opted for the firing squad. "He told me: 'I lived by the gun, I murdered with a gun, so I will die by the gun'."
Brandie, 33, said she was strongly opposed to the death penalty, even though Gardner approved of it. "I oppose it not because of my dad but because there are 10 commandments and one says thou shalt not kill."
The family of one of the victims ? Nick Kirk, who was shot in the stomach as Gardner tried to escape from a courthouse and died 10 years later ? were also outside the prison, demonstrating their support for his execution. "You don't want to wish somebody dead," said Kirk's daughter Barb Webb. "But our family wants this finished ? we need to heal."
Kirk's wife, BelDean, and granddaughter Jamie were among 25 people who watched the execution from two witness rooms protected from the risk of ricochet by the bullet-proof glass.
The shooting was carried out in a specially designed execution chamber inside Utah state prison, a simple room measuring 6 metres by 7 metres (20ft by 24ft). Gardner was taken into the chamber shortly after midnight (7am BST), having spent his final hours sleeping, watching the Lord of the Rings trilogy of films and reading the thriller Divine Justice.
He was strapped to a black chair with a metal tray placed beneath it to collect his blood, had a hood placed over his head, and a white circular target pinned to his chest to mark his heart ? the precise location of which had been identified earlier by a prison doctor.
Then five local police officers, chosen for their skills as marksmen and kept anonymous by law to minimise the risk of reprisals, were ushered into the chamber and lined up behind a brick wall at the other end of the room about 7.5 metres away. They were handed .30-calibre rifles, the muzzles of which they inserted through a gap in the wall to point at the condemned man.
Four of the rifles were loaded with a single live bullet. The fifth contained an "ineffective" round ? which unlike a blank gives the same recoil as a live round; that way none of the five executioners know whether they delivered the fatal shot, thus lessening their psychological burden.
Gardner never disputed his guilt or sought to minimise the terrible acts he had committed. In 1980 he was convicted of robbery and sent to Utah state prison, where his life would end 30 years later.
In 1984 he escaped, and on 9 October, high on cocaine, he shot and killed a barman, Melvyn Otterstrom, at Salt Lake City's Cheers Tavern.
On trial for that murder, he made another escape attempt on 2 April 1985, arranging for a gun to be slipped to him by a female accomplice as he was being brought to Salt Lake City's central courthouse. In the melee, he shot a lawyer called Michael Burdell in the right eye. Burdell died in hospital 45 minutes later.
Burdell's family has consistently opposed the execution of Gardner. His niece, Donna Taylor, speaking to the Guardian outside the prison, said her uncle had always been against the death penalty. "He just didn't like the idea of killing anybody. He wouldn't have wanted this."
Police in Argentina are searching for a footballer who is said to have shot and killed a referee after being sent off in a match played in the Cordoba province.
According to local reports, the player retrieved a gun from his bag after being shown a red card, returned to the pitch and shot 48-year-old Cesar Flores dead.
A police source told the Efe news agency: ¡°It all happened during the football match. We don¡¯t know [exactly what took place], but it appears the player was angry, fetched a gun and killed him.¡±
Local reports said Flores was shot three times, in the head, chest and neck, while another player, Walter Zarate, was injured, but is understood to be out of danger.
Authorities in Argentina continue to struggle with violence in football. In June last year a match between Ferro and Tiro Federal was abandoned after a played punched a referee unconscious after being shown a yellow card.
Last month, five players were sent off during a friendly between River Plate and Boca Juniors. The referee Patricio Loustau booked nine others during the game.
In the 56 years since the day Buddy Holly died, there has been no shortage of rumours, conspiracy theories, books, not to mention that song, about the plane crash that robbed rock¡¯n¡¯roll of one of its most promising stars one frigid February morning.
The official explanation for the crash on 3 February 1959 ? that a relatively inexperienced pilot made mistakes in difficult, snowy conditions ? has always seemed too mundane for many people to accept. That such a huge musical force, aged just 22, should have been silenced before he had barely started, together with Ritchie Valens, 17, of La Bamba fame, and JP Richardson, aka the Big Bopper, 28, surely demanded a more dramatic narrative than mere pilot error.
Hence the frenzied speculation concerning the discovery of a gun supposedly owned by Holly in the same Iowa cornfield where the mangled wreck of the Beechcraft Bonanza was found. Hence the unproven rumours that the pilot¡¯s seat had a bullet hole through it, and that two chambers of the recovered pistol were empty.
Now the issue of what happened that cold midwestern morning looks set to be opened up all over again. Federal safety investigators have indicated that they are considering a request to re-examine the accident.
The request came from LJ Coon, a pilot who has made his own investigation into the crash and has approached the National Transportation Safety Board¡¯s cold case unit urging them to take another look. Coon believes that the finding of the Civil Aeronautics Board in 1959 that the accident was primarily caused by pilot error amounts to an injustice for Roger Peterson, the 21-year-old pilot who was at the controls of the Beechcraft Bonanza and who died alongside the three musicians.
Coon told the Pilot Tribune this year that ¡°Roger would have flown out and about this airport at night, under multiple different conditions. He had to be very familiar with all directions of this airport in and out.¡±
The flight expert is encouraging federal investigators to consider other factors that could help explain the disaster. He points to a possible weight imbalance in the craft ? Peterson and Holly upfront weighed about 160lbs each, while Valens and Richardson were considerably heavier ? newly installed flight instruments, as well as a possible commotion among the passengers shortly after take-off.
Whatever comes out of this renewed spotlight on the accident, the tragedy is certain to continue to obsess Holly fans, imbued as it was with so many searing details. The plane went down just four minutes into its flight from Clear Lake, Iowa, en route for Fargo, North Dakota.
Holly, fresh out of his breakup with the Crickets, had teamed up with Valens, Richardson and the rest of their band and had been playing the Surf Ballroom in Clear Lake as part of their midwestern ¡°winter dance party¡± tour. Holly was fed up with the grim bus rides between tour stops and couldn¡¯t face the bone-jangling journey to the next scheduled appearance in Moorhead, Minnesota, so arranged for the plane ride instead.
Other members of the band had chillingly narrow escapes. Waylon Jennings, playing bass on the tour, had given up his seat to Richardson who was sick and wanted to get speedily to a doctor. Tommy Allsup, on guitar, had tossed a coin with Valens for the final seat ? Valens had won.
In 2007 the rumour-mongering around the crash prompted Richardson¡¯s son Jay - the Big Bopper Jr, as he calls himself ? to arrange for his father¡¯s body to be exhumed and subjected to forensic testing. No indication of foul play was found.
On that occasion, the local Clear Lake paper, the Globe Gazette, predicted that the results of the examination ¡°should end speculation¡±. How wrong they were.
A man has survived firing a nailgun into his own brain ? in what surgeons worryingly said was not an unheard-of occurrence.
Dante Autullo of Chicago thought doctors were joking, feeling sure he had only been grazed by the nail when it flew past as he was building a shed. Even when hospital medics produced an X-ray he was sceptical.
"When they brought in the picture, I said to the doctor 'Is this a joke? Did you get that out of the doctors joke file?'" the 32-year-old said. "The doctor said 'No man, that's in your head.'"
His companion, Gail Glaenzer, bathed what looked like a flesh wound after Autullo misfired the gun. He went on with his work, did some snow plowing and only agreed to go to hospital the next day after waking up feeling nauseated.
Autullo had surgery at Advocate Christ medical centre in Oak Lawn, where doctors removed the 3 1/4-inch (7.62cm) nail. It had come within millimetres of the part of the brain that controls motor function.
As he was rushed by ambulance to another hospital for surgery, he posted a picture of the X-ray on Facebook.
"It really felt like I got punched on the side of the head," he said, adding that he continued working. "I thought it went past my ear."
There are pain-sensitive nerves on the skull but none within the brain itself ? so Autello only felt like he had been hit in the head.
"He feels good. He moved all his limbs, he's talking normal, he remembers everything," Glaenzer said. "It's amazing, a miracle."
Autullo's neurosurgeon, Leslie Schaffer, said the case was unusual but not extremely rare.
A nail did not go in like a bullet, which would break into multiple pieces, he said.
"This (the nail) is thinner, with a small trajectory, and pointed at the end," he said. "The bone doesn't fracture much because the nail has a small tip."
Schaffer said Autollo's skull slowed down the nail, which was removed by making holes on either side of its entry point and pulling it out along with a piece of the skull.
The hole was covered with titanium mesh after the two-hour operation, hospital spokesman Mike Maggio said.
The Hackney police arrived minutes later to find a 250-metre trail of smashed glass, twisted metal and broken bodies - a scene more reminiscent of Beirut or the Bronx than London.
But when local people woke up to the horrific scene, they simply went about their business. Some people even brought out their children to look at the police cordons.
In the past two years there have been at least six gangland-style executions in streets surrounding Lower and Upper Clapton Roads. There have been many other woundings and countless occasions on which weapons have been produced and fired.
The London borough of Hackney now has the distinction of being the place where you are more likely to hear the sound of gunshots that anywhere else in Britain. Many of the Clapton Road shootings have stood out because of the levels of ruthlessness and brutality involved. Gunmen have pursued their victims in broad daylight, finishing them off at point blank range in front of streets packed with witnesses.
'The bodies were still in the car up until midday,' said one shopkeeper who asked not to be named. 'No one wants the shootings to continue, we would all like to see an end to it. But at the same time, no one is going to say anything. It is all too easy to understand what these people are capable of. No one is going to risk crossing them.'
Hackney Borough Commander Chief Superintendent Peter Robbins told The Observer: 'I fully accept that there are more shots discharged in the area possibly than anywhere else in Britain.'
The area has been synonymous with drug-related crime ever since the term Yardie came into common usage in the late Eighties. The first mass police raid on a crack den took place in nearby Dalston, where Errol 'Rankin' Dread, once dubbed the most dangerous man in Britain and the number one Yardie Godfather, made his home.
Philip Ettienne, a former undercover officer with the Metropolitan Police who documented his experiences of infiltrating Yardie gangs in his book The Infiltrators, said last night: 'It has always been a terrible area. The official number of shooting incidents is high but the reality is higher - a huge number of gun-related incidents go completely unreported. If you look at the call-out records for the ARVs [armed response vehicles], you'll find they go to Hackney more than anywhere else. In fact, if they are at a loose end, they always hang around there because they know that sooner or later, the call will come.'
The shootings started in January 1997 when Guy-Dance Dacres, a 16-year-old black student, was shot dead at a private party at Chimes nightclub, one of the area's most popular venues and the scene of many of the bloodiest encounters.
On 21 August 1999, a 38-year-old black man was shot in nearby Powell Road minutes after leaving Chimes. Four men were seen frantically fleeing from another who was giving chase and firing.
On 16 December last year, Anthony Rose-Windon, 25, was gunned down outside Chimes. Police say he then crawled to Kenning Hall Road, a few hundred yards away, where he was found dead from multiple gunshot wounds to the chest.
In the past two years, the number of incidents appears to have accelerated and moved beyond the black community. On 27 March 2000, a man tried to use a stolen credit card at a Shell petrol station on Lower Clapton road. When staff refused to return it to him, he left, only to return moments later with a handgun. The staff were saved only by the bulletproof glass that deflected his frenzied shots.
On 25 May 2000, Memet Adiguzel, 37, a Turk, was shot six times as he sat in his car on the junction of Upper Clapton Road and Lea Bridge Road. It was 4.45pm, but broad daylight and a host of witnesses did not deter the killers. Several men were arrested for the incident, which is believed to be drug-related. One of them has skipped bail.
On 20 June, a bejewelled man was loitering outside a West Indian Cafe called Too Sweet, a short walk from Lower Clapton Road on nearby Chatsworth Road. A man in an Afro wig walked up and shot him several times. The victim survived.
Five days later, Meneliek Robinson was driving his red BMW convertible along Upper Clapton Road, when two motorbikes, each carrying two black men, drove up behind him. One overtook him and pulled up, screeching to a halt and blocking his way. The other rode up from behind and stopped alongside.
Its passenger dismounted, and walked up to Robinson's side window. He fired several shots, and then the two bikes sped away. Robinson staggered from the car and collapsed on the street. He died of massive blood loss.
The next week, John Nugent, 46, died from another brutal street attack. At 11pm, on the corner of Erswick Street and Lower Clapton Road, he was attacked by a gang of men, beaten unconscious, and then pushed under a bus. He was pronounced dead on arrival at Homerton Hospital.
On 23 October, a man in his early twenties was gunned down a a quarter of a mile from Lower Clapton Road at 8.30pm as he walked along Fountayne Road in Stoke Newington.
Then, on 24 November, an 18-year-old boy was shot in the leg and hand on Newick Road at 10 minutes to midnight. He survived, putting his hand up to defend himself from the gunshots. There have been no arrests for the attack.
The shootings have marked a shift in the centre of Yardie operations. Previous attacks had taken place in Harlesden and Brixton, leaving the likes of Henry Lawes and Avril Johnson, Michelle Carby and Laverne Forbes dead.
The latest double murder investigation is being run by Detective Superintendent John Sweeney, who is also attached to Operation Trident, the pan-London initiative which targets gun-related drug crime. He knows the key to solving the crime is to appeal to the local community and get them to come forward with information. He has his work cut out: people are just too scared to talk.
How bad is gun crime in the US? The latest data from the FBI's uniform crime reports provides a fascinating picture of the use of firearms in crimes across America.
Barack Obama is under pressure to tighten gun laws after following the disclosure by police that the Newtown gunman used a semi-automatic assault rifle equipped with "numerous" high-capacity magazines holding hundreds of bullets to carry out his massacre of young children.
The US has the highest gun ownership rate in the world - there are 89 guns for every 100 Americans, compared to 6 in England and Wales.
And the murder figures themselves are astounding for Brits used to around 550 murders per year. In 2011 - the latest year for which detailed statistics are available - there were 12,664 murders in the US. Of those, 8,583 were caused by firearms.
The FBI crime statistics are based on reports to FBI bureau and local law enforcement. The figures are not complete - there are no stats for Florida or Alabama on firearm murders. But even so it provides a detailed picture of attacks by state.
In fact, gun crime, like all crime across the US (and the UK, for that matter), is going down - you can see how much in the graph above. And the vast majority invlove firearms.
The figures show that California had the highest number of gun murders last year - 1,790, which is 68% of all murders that year and equivalent to 3.25 per 100,000 people in the state. Big as that figure is, it's still down by 3% on the previous year. Other key findings include:
? While gun crime is down in the vast majority of states, it is up in Indiana, Arkansas, North Carolina, Louisiana and several of the smaller states
? If you look at the firearms murder rate per 100,000 people, District of Columbia comes out top - with 12 firearms murders per 100,000 men, women and children in the state. There were 77 firearms murders in DC in 2010, down 22% on 2009
? DC is followed by Louisiana (10.16) and Mississippi (7.46)
? DC is also top for firearms robberies per 100,000 people - with 242.56
? If you look at aggravated assaults involving a firearm, Tennessee (137.58) and South Carolina (127.88) come above Arkansas (100.56)
The full data is below. What can you do with it?
Data journalism and data visualisations from the Guardian
? Search the world's government data with our gateway
? Search the world's global development data with our gateway
? Flickr Please post your visualisations and mash-ups on our Flickr group
??Contact us at data@guardian.co.uk
? Get the A-Z of data
? More at the Datastore directory
? Follow us on Twitter
? Like us on Facebook
The fashion guru and tycoon Gianni Versace, founder of one of haute couture's most flamboyant and renowned empires, was shot dead outside his villa in Miami Beach yesterday morning in what police believe was a carefully planned murder.
The chief of Miami Beach police, Richard Barreto, said: "I believe that he was targeted," but refused to confirm a rumour that a contract had been put out on Versace's life.
By last night, the FBI had launched a huge manhunt for the killer, a white male in his twenties who walked up and shot Versace twice in the head at point-blank range. The designer was opening the gate to the villa after returning from buying an Italian newspaper at a favourite local restaurant, the News Cafe.
Only days ago, Versace, aged 50, was being showered with praise for his latest collection at the Paris show, acknowledging applause from the catwalk flanked by supermodels.
Yesterday, there were pools of blood on the pavement outside his elegant villa after the shooting at 9am.
Mr Barreto indicated that the handgun used in the murder had been sent for examination. Asked if there was anyone else in the villa at the time of the murder, he said: "My information is that he was alone." He refused to comment on a local rumour that there had been an unspecified "incident" involving Versace outside his home two nights ago.
An eyewitness, Eddie Biachi, said: "There were two shots fired in his head. The police came very fast; they were trying to help him, revive him."
A surgeon, Phillip Villanueva, said Versace had been shot in the back of the head.
Al Boza, a police spokesman, said Versace had been opening the gate to his home on Ocean Drive when he was approached by a "white male, aged about 25, wearing a grey T-shirt, black backpack and black shorts, and a white hat ... who shot him at point-blank range".
Local television reports said the man's clothing had been dumped in a nearby garage and had been recovered for analysis by police.
Witnesses said the killer got into a vehicle which looked like a taxi. The driver has not been found.
There were three theories last night: a killing by a jealous, obsessed maniac; a contract killing, either the result of a love affair or professional relationship turned sour; or by the Mafia or some other criminal mob.
There had been no sign of any overt threat to Versace, at least none that was recorded by police in the United States or Italy.
The nature of the murder suggests that the killer either knew Versace personally or had "staked him out".
Versace, the first of Italy's leading designers to confirm that he was gay, went into the fashion business 25 years ago, setting up his own house with his sister Donatella. There had been tensions recently over succession within the vast company.
Despite becoming more reclusive, Versace was a popular figure on the social circuit of Ocean Drive's "beautiful people" and entertained his friends frequently and in style.
His elegant, three-storey mock-Spanish villa was a landmark on the fashion circuit, although in a quiet stretch of Ocean Drive, away from the hotels and the famous Art Deco strip.
Versace had clothed the world's best-known women, including Princess Diana, who "relaunched" herself recently as a glamour queen in Vanity Fair magazine wearing a dress from his latest collection. She said yesterday she was "devastated" by the news of his death.
In Versace's native Italy, the news provoked disbelief and concern over what could emerge from the police inquiry. The Milan fashion business is pivotal to the success of one of the world's biggest textile industries and its good name has been sullied twice recently.
Last May, Versace's brother, Santo, was convicted of bribery along with two of Italy's leading designers. In 1995, Maurizio Gucci, of the luggage-to-frocks luxury goods dynasty, was shot dead outside his office in Milan. His wife, Patrizia Reggiani Martinelli, was arrested and charged with ordering his murder earlier this year. As Versace acknowledged in an interview two years ago, there have been rumours - vigorously denied by the family - that the company founded to market his creations had underworld links. In 1995, the Independent on Sunday paid substantial damages for what it admitted were libels about his business practices.
Yesterday, many Italians noted privately that the shots to the back of Versace's neck were typical of an underworld hit.
Fellow designers expressed incredulity. "The news of Gianni Versace's death has left me in a state of shock," said Giorgio Armani. "My reaction is one of revolt against such an unnatural and violent death."
Versace's murderer, Andrew Cunanan, shot himself in the head when cornered by Miami police in a houseboat three miles from the murder scene. The gun he used was the same he shot Versace with eight days earlier. He had killed four other men in a killing spree which had started in April 1997.
A 26-year-old woman who was working in the store said: "It was about 7.45pm. I was looking at my watch, ready to go home, then bangs - four gunshots downstairs. A girl got shot. There were shoppers still walking around totally unaware." She added: "I think it was a girl on the beauty counter who was shot and I think it was her boyfriend that killed her. I think she was dead and he was still alive.
"It was really scary. There was no announcement. We just heard people screaming and ran. I thought that it wasn't just a bottle dropping on the floor, it's something more than that.
"There weren't many shoppers around so that was pretty lucky. There was no evacuation of staff. They should have responded quicker, we were all terrified. We thought maybe it was a bomb."
Another witness told BBC News 24 that she had been told that a former security guard had shot a beauty counter worker before turning the gun on himself.
Police said last night that both the gunman and his victim were in their late 20s or early 30s. They said they were trying to establish their identities but added that they were not looking for anyone else in connection with the killings.
A spokeswoman for the London Ambulance Service said that two ambulances and two rapid response cars had been dispatched to the Knightsbridge store following a call just after 7.45pm. "We treated two patients who had been shot, one male and one female," she said. "Unfortunately both suffered cardiac arrests and died."
The store's fifth-floor bar and restaurant stayed open for two hours following the incident but they were eventually evacuated at 10pm. The surrounding area was also cordoned off and guarded by armed officers.
Natasha Horsey, a 20-year-old student at Bristol University, was having dinner in the restaurant when the shooting happened. "My friend came to join us at 8 o'clock and she was not allowed upstairs so I went down to get her," she said. "We were in the middle of supper. The waiters just said police are coming up and so we had to evacuate."
Harvey Nichols began life in 1813 as a small linen shop in a terraced house on the corner of Knightsbridge and Sloane Street in London and has gone on to become one of the UK's most well-known stores. Over the last few years Harvey Nichols has branched out across Britain opening stores in Edinburgh, Leeds, Manchester and Birmingham.
It also has branches in Saudi Arabia and Hong Kong and plans to open stores in Dubai, Dublin and Istanbul.
A two-year-old girl and a Reuters photographer were wounded and at least seven people killed yesterday during the third day of gunbattles in Rio de Janeiro.
The unprecedented violence, which has so far left at least 49 people dead, is focused on the Complexo do Alemao, a labyrinth of red-brick houses that is the headquarters of Rio's oldest drug faction, the Red Command.
Last night local drug traffickers fired at police helicopters as hundreds of police and army operatives surrounded the giant favela, home to some 70,000 impoverished Brazilians.
Giovana Isabela da Penha, aged two, was rushed to hospital after being shot inside her home in the Nova Brasilia shantytown, part of the Complexo do Alemao.
Paulo Whitaker, an experienced Brazilian-born photographer, was shot in the left shoulder while covering explosive gunfights between police and heavily armed drug traffickers. According to one report Whitaker told doctors he had removed a bullet from his shoulder.
A police source told the Guardian that traffickers had targeted journalists and citizens on the outskirts of the slum, although a statement from Reuters said Whitaker had been caught in crossfire.
In a live interview with Brazilian TV last night, Rio's security secretary Jose Mariano Beltrame vowed to press on with operations. "We cannot back down. We must carry on. We have to occupy territory, take control of territory and advance," said a visibly exhausted Beltrame.
Among those killed yesterday was a suspected drug trafficker named by police as 24-year-old Thiago Ferreira Faria. Faria, who was shot through the chest, was better-known by his nickname G3, a reference to the assault rifle of the same name.
Throughout the day a stream of gun-shot wound victims, including a 61-year-old woman, were taken to Getulio Vargas hospital, which reputedly treats the highest number of gunshot wounds in Latin America each year.
Beltrame said slum pacification projects, which have so far taken control of 13 favelas, would help free Rio's poor from armed gangs by 2014, when Brazil hosts the World Cup. "I am sure that through our actions over the last two years we have helped many people gain the most important thing for human dignity: hope. By 2014 this will be brought to all of Rio's citizens," he vowed.
In a statement, Amnesty International urged "authorities to act proportionately and within the law in their response to the wave of criminal gang violence that has swept Rio de Janeiro".
"This violence is totally unacceptable but the police response has put communities at risk. The authorities must ensure that the security and wellbeing of the broader population comes first and foremost in any operation carried out in residential areas," said Patrick Wilcken, the group's Brazil researcher.
I took this in 1971. It was such a long time ago, like a different lifetime. The man's name was Gene Knight. He was an old friend ? I'd known him for most of my life. We were all taking drugs, and he had this little pistol in his pocket. He reached in there to get it and shot himself in the leg. It was an accident.
I stood in the corner, taking pictures. When something like this happens, you have to turn pro and just do your job. The girl looked up at me and said something like: "You're the coldest motherfucker I ever met." Like I'm supposed to take the bullet out of his leg. It was a very strange place to be: it was as if I were one of the people in the?photograph, only I had a camera. I?can split myself in two and have some?distance.
He was fine in the end, it was just a little flesh wound. But we carried him around to a couple of doctors and got prescriptions for some kind of synthetic morphine you could only get for cancer and gunshot wounds. So shooting himself actually meant he got a lot of good?drugs.
I had started photographing my friends in 1962, but with no idea of ever doing a book at all. I?was just practising. Really, I wanted to make a film, but it was impossible to do?it on my own. So in 1970 I thought about finishing up a book, and I laid it all out with the pictures I'd already taken. I was determined to get in everything that I'd seen over the years, so I went back to live in Tulsa, Oklahoma (I'd been living in New York). I knew what photographs I needed to finish the book because I?knew the Tulsa life so well.
I knew when I went back that certain things would happen, including violence. I didn't know when those things would happen, or?where they would happen, but I?was ready for them. I was ready for?anything
A white Louisiana police officer shot and killed a black man following a confrontation outside a Baton Rouge convenience store, authorities said.An autopsy showed Alton Sterling, 37, of Baton Rouge, died on Tuesday of multiple gunshot wounds to the chest and back, said East Baton Rouge parish coroner Dr William Clark.
Officers had responded to the store at about 12.35am on Tuesday after an anonymous caller indicated a man selling music CDs and wearing a red shirt had threatened him with a gun, said corporal L¡¯Jean McKneely.
Two officers responded and there was an altercation with the man, then one officer fatally shot the suspect, McKneely said. Both officers were placed on administrative leave under standard department policy, he said.
The store¡¯s owner, Abdul Muflahi, told WAFB-TV that the first officer used a Taser on Sterling and the second officer tackled the man. Muflahi said that as Sterling fought to get the officer off him the first officer shot him ¡°four to six times¡±.
Video of the shooting that circulated on Twitter sparked outrage.
Muflani said Sterling did not have a gun in his hand at the time but he saw officers remove a gun from Sterling¡¯s pocket after the shooting.
McKneely said late on Tuesday that he could not confirm Muflahi¡¯s description of the alleged event or any other details of the investigation.On Tuesday night about 150 protesters took to the streets of Baton Rouge chanting ¡°Black Lives Matter¡± and ¡°No justice, no peace¡±.
The protest continued past midnight and demonstrators said they would hold a rally outside city hall on Wednesday morning.
¡°We¡¯ve seen a video that¡¯s disturbing, and gruesome,¡± Mike McClanahan, Baton Rouge president of the NAACP, who was among the protesters for much of the evening, told the Advocate. ¡°We know that justice must be served.¡±
Associated Press contributed to this report
A man has been shot dead in an altercation that left two others in hospital with gunshot and stab wounds.
Police sealed off Grantham Road and Farm Road after the incident broke out in the Sparkbrook area of Birmingham on Wednesday night.
West Midlands police said: "Two other men were taken to hospital, one with a gunshot wound and one with knife injuries.
"Police are currently investigating the incident, which started at around 7.30pm last night, and a number of arrests have been made following the disorder."
Roads remained cordoned off on Thursday morning. Police are urging anyone with information to contact 101 or Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111.
A century ago, a silk vest could have saved the world from toppling into the war in which millions of soldiers and civilians would die.
Tests at the Royal Armouries are expected to prove that an allegedly bulletproof silk vest, believed to have been owned by Archduke Franz Ferdinand, could indeed have stopped the shot fired by the Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip.
At the time of the assassination, at near point-blank range by a teenage gunman, described later as "the shot heard around the world", it was reported that Franz Ferdinand owned but was not wearing body armour.
Polish inventor Casimir Zeglen created the vests, which were made of light but strong layers of organic material, particularly silk. By the 1900s they were sold across the world, and had been bought by many heads of state. Franz Ferdinand was well aware of the risk of an attempt on his life ? his uncle had survived an attempt a few years earlier ? and had been warned that his visit was likely to make unrest in Sarajevo worse. Exactly a month after his death, on 28 July, Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia, allies on both sides were drawn in by 4 August, and the world was changed forever.
The Royal Armouries has had replicas of the vests made to the original patent specification, and is testing them with ammunition and weapons similar to the 1910 Browning semi-automatic pistol fired on 28 June 1914 by Princip.
The tests continue but have already established that the silk does have bullet-stopping capabilities.
Lisa Traynor, first world war researcher at the Armouries, said that her interest in the story began when she came upon a Browning identical to the one used by Princip.
"Upon examining its serial number, I realised it was only 516 away from the actual pistol used in the assassination and would probably have been manufactured around the same time.
"This made me think about the 'what if scenario' surrounding the death of the archduke. If he hadn't been killed, would the war have been delayed?
"After months of independent research and with the assistance of international academics on the subject, I discovered that it was entirely possible the archduke may have owned a piece of body armour. Our first world war team thought it would be interesting to test the theory of silk body armour against the Browning Model 1910, to understand the ballistic capabilities of 19th-century body armour against 20th-century firepower.
"I don't want to pre-empt the next round of tests. However, I can report that silk does have bullet-stopping capabilities. So this research could result in very exciting results."
The replicas and the results of the tests will be displayed in Bullets, Blades and Battle Bowlers, an exhibition opening at the museum in Leeds in September.
On 28 June the assassination was a botched affair. Princip was a slight and sickly teenager, a member of the Young Bosnia movement that was campaigning for Serbian independence from Austria-Hungary. Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife Sophie came to Sarajevo on a civic visit, and toured the streets in an open-top car despite the known risks. Several of the conspirators staking out the route lost their nerve, but one threw a grenade that missed their car, injuring others in the motorcade and several spectators. Later, when the couple was heading towards the hospital to visit those injured in the first incident, their chauffeur took a wrong turn, tried to reverse, but stalled the car just outside a cafe where Princip was standing. He fired twice into the car, hitting Ferdinand in the neck and Sophie in the abdomen. Both died within the hour.
Princip was arrested on the spot, having failed to commit suicide with a cyanide capsule that was out of date. He died of tuberculosis in an Austrian prison in 1918, aged just 23.
The gun, and a bomb also used by the Serbian anarchists, part of the police evidence collected after the assassination, survive in the collection of the Museum of Military History in Vienna.
A man has admitted to the non-fatal 1994 shooting of Tupac Shakur, claiming he was paid $2,500 to rob the rapper at Manhattan's Quad studio. Dexter Isaac, currently serving a life sentence on unrelated charges, said he was hired by hip-hop manager Jimmy "Henchman" Rosemond to ambush and mug Shakur, setting off three years of reprisals that left Shakur and Notorious BIG dead.
"Jimmy, I say to you: I have kept your secrets for years," Isaac told AllHiphop. "I have stayed silent in prison for the past 13 years, doing a life sentence like a real soldier should, when you and everybody have turned your backs on me ... Now I would like to clear up a few things, because the statute of limitations is over, and no one can be charged, and I'm just plain tired of listening to your lies. In 1994, James Rosemond hired me to rob 2Pac Shakur at the Quad studio. He gave me $2,500, plus all the jewellery I took, except for one ring, which he wanted for himself."
Isaac has spent the past decade behind bars, serving time on a 1998 indictment for murder, robbery, fraud and witness intimidation. He and Rosemond have long been linked with Shakur's robbery, though neither man was ever charged. In 2008, the LA Times published ? and later retracted ? an article contending that Rosemond and other associates of Sean Combs (AKA Diddy) arranged the attack as payback for Shakur's rejection of Combs's record label. The LA Times ultimately admitted their allegations were based on fabricated FBI reports. But Shakur himself had made these claims before his death. "Promised [to] pay back Jimmy Henchman in due time," he rapped on Against All Odds. "Heard the guns bust, but your tricks never shut me up ... All out warfare, eye for eye."
Now a manager for stars including Sean Kingston and the Game, Rosemond is allegedly on the run. He disappeared in May, amid federal drugs charges, complaining that events had "caught [him] off guard" in a letter to XXL magazine. "I came up from nothing and made some mistakes early in my life, of which I have already served time," he wrote. "Since then I have worked hard to establish my career in the music industry only to be targeted by these opportunistic prosecutors with a personal vendetta against me." Rosemond asserted he was being smeared by scurrilous informants, including Isaac.
Isaac now says it was this allegation that prompted him to come forward about the events of 30 November 1994. "I have never been a rat for anybody," Isaac replied. Instead he alleges that Rosemond himself is a "turncoat rat". "If I was an informant like you, I would've been home years ago with my family," Isaac wrote.
Isaac did not admit to the September 1996 murder of Shakur, and also refused to comment on the March 1997 slaying of his "friend" Notorious BIG. Both these crimes remain unsolved. "But I would like to give their mothers some closure," he wrote. "It's about time that someone did, and I will do so at a different time. Jimmy, you and Puffy like to come off all innocent-like, but as the saying goes: you can fool some of the people some of the time, but you cannot fool all of the people all of the time."
Had he lived, Tupac Shakur would have celebrated his 40th birthday today.
It¡¯s rather difficult to compare data from different time periods, according to different methodologies, across different parts of the world, and still come to definitive conclusions.
But now that we have built The Counted, a definitive record of people killed by police in the US this year, at least there is some accountability in America ? even if data from the rest of the world is still catching up.
It is undeniable that police in the US often contend with much more violent situations and more heavily armed individuals than police in other developed democratic societies. Still, looking at our data for the US against admittedly less reliable information on police killings elsewhere paints a dramatic portrait, and one that resonates with protests that have gone global since a killing last year in Ferguson, Missouri: the US is not just some outlier in terms of police violence when compared with countries of similar economic and political standing.
America is the outlier ? and this is what a crisis looks like.
Fact: In the first 24 days of 2015, police in the US fatally shot more people than police did in England and Wales, combined, over the past 24 years.
Behind the numbers: According to The Counted, the Guardian¡¯s special project to track every police killing this year, there were 59 fatal police shootings in the US for the days between 1 January and 24 January.
According to data collected by the UK advocacy group Inquest, there have been 55 fatal police shootings ? total ? in England and Wales from 1990 to 2014.
The US population is roughly six times that of England and Wales. According to the World Bank, the US has a per capita intentional homicide rate five times that of the UK.
Fact: There has been just one fatal shooting by Icelandic police in the country¡¯s 71-year history. The city of Stockton, California ? with 25,000 fewer residents than all of Iceland combined ? had three fatal encounters in the first five months of 2015.
Behind the numbers: A 2013 police shooting in Iceland drew international attention because it was the first of its kind; there had literally never been a fatal police shooting recorded there before two years ago.
In Stockton, Patrick Wetter, Matautu Nuu and Carl Lao were all fatally shot by police in the 64-day span between 6 January and 4 March. According to US census data from 2013, Stockton has a population of 298,118; World Bank data puts Iceland¡¯s population at 323,764 for the same year.
Iceland¡¯s official intentional homicide rate is so low that it does not register in World Bank data on intentional homicides per 100,000 people. For the US, the rate is five per 100,000.
Fact: Police in the US have shot and killed more people ? in every week this year ? than are reportedly shot and killed by German police in an entire year.
Behind the numbers: The Counted database shows that the first week of 2015 had the fewest fatal police shootings of any this year, with 13.
The German Police University concluded in 2012 that German police had killed six people by gunshot in 2011 and seven in 2012.
According to the German data and the Guardian¡¯s count, more unarmed black men (19) have been fatally shot by US police in 2015 than citizens of any race, armed or unarmed, fatally shot in Germany during all of 2010 and 2011 (15).
The US population is roughly four times that of Germany, and according to the World Bank, the US has a per capita intentional homicide rate five times that of Germany.
Fact: Police in the US fatally shot more people in one month this year than police in Australia officially reported during a span of 19 years.
Behind the numbers: The Counted database shows that police in the US fatally shot 97 people in March 2015, the highest one-month total recorded by the Guardian.
A 2013 study from the Australian Institute of Criminology (AIC) found 94 fatal police shootings for the period between 1992 and 2011.
In Australia, as opposed to the US, all police shootings are subject to national monitoring by law. The US population is nearly 14 times that of Australia, and the US has a per capita intentional homicide rate five times that of Australia.
Fact: Police in Canada average 25 fatal shooting a year. In California, a state just 10% more populous than Canada, police in 2015 have fatally shot nearly three times as many people in just five months.
Behind the numbers: So far in 2015, police in California have fatally shot 72 people, according to the Guardian¡¯s database ? the most thorough accounting for officer-involved fatalities ever built in the US.
In Canada, reliable nationwide numbers on police shootings don¡¯t yet exist.
But a journalist for the Independent in Canada did combine data from the provinces that report police killings ? and extrapolated that Canadian police kill an average of 25 people by gunshot every year.
The US has an intentional homicide rate two and a half times that of Canada, according to the World Bank.
Fact: Police fired 17 bullets at Antonio Zambrano-Montes, who was ¡°armed¡± with a rock. That¡¯s nearly three times what police in Finland are reported to have fired during all of 2013.
Behind the numbers: Zambrano-Montes was killed in February by officers responding to reports that he was throwing rocks at cars. The incident was caught on video, with 17 shots fired; according to police, ¡°five or six¡± struck Zambrano-Montes.
In Finland, according to chief inspector Jukka Salmine, police fired just six bullets in all of 2013.
Three days after I arrived in Tambura, the people of the small village celebrated South Sudan¡¯s first birthday. It was July 2012, and I was there as a volunteer for International Medical Corps. It was a joy to watch the celebrations in this place 460km from the capital, Juba. Hundreds of people were parading, dancing, and singing, reflecting the relief and hope that had come after four decades of war.
I can¡¯t complain about my life in Juba ? you would not have variety, but you would find a little of everything. The restaurants were few, but they served global cuisines, and there were good bars that were usually filled with expats for after-office hangouts ? they could be confused for being any European pub. After all, alcohol is the party anthem regardless of a nation¡¯s instability. For fitness enthusiasts there were sports grounds. The roads were mostly potholes but at least they connected major areas of the city. Importantly, the team that I worked with was amazing ? strangers quickly turned into friends in those resource-constrained settings.
My life in South Sudan was quite normal until war broke out on the night of 15 December 2013. By then, I worked in operations for the Danish Refugee Council and I went to the field to set up logistics, healthcare, water and sanitation programmes. My heart would skip a beat with every gunshot I heard, and that continued for two to three days. Organisations who could afford to charter planes started to pull out their staff, initially from the capital and then later from the field offices. The airport was full of queues of people rushing to leave the country. Within a week, only about 20% of staff remained, including my colleagues Gaurav and Julian and me.
The remaining expats started to gather at the compound for the United Nations Missions in Sudan (UNMis). The place was dirty and crowded. People would think of their family, their children back home, but no one was able to speak of their fear with each other. Gaurav was my superviser and hangout buddy, but we were unable to talk to each other. The emotions were so intense they were difficult to put into words.
When we would return to our residence in the evening, we would talk about digging an escape hole in our compound, just in case. I often looked around the room to spot a place to hide in case the gunfire started again. The news of an attack on a humanitarian base, lootings and killings had become normal. Only after a week did awestruck people start communicating with each other, building mutual confidence to survive, and discussing response strategies.
By January, more humanitarian staff started arriving because organisations had started receiving emergency funds. I was deployed to Bentiu, a field site that had seen an attack only a week before. The situation was no better, corpses were lying on the road and the living conditions were harsh.
Slowly, things got better. More tents were added and more people arrived, but still the canteen in the UNMis compound was only able to cook rice and beans for several days, as they were running out of supplies and cargo could not arrive due to security concerns. The day the cargo finally arrived, the joy of the workers knew no bounds, they would now get a proper meal to replenish their energy after working in the hot and humid weather.
After four months of improvements, war broke out again in mid-April. From the early morning, armoured vehicles hovered around the UNMis base and fired bullets. We had to run towards the bunkers with all the energy and passion to survive. Sanjeev (another of my colleagues) dodged a bullet by a few centimetres. When we entered the bunker, we all were shivering.
One evening, the humanitarian team brought in more than 100 wounded civilians from the town. Without any clinic being set up, people were running here and there providing water and primary treatment to the wounded people lying all over the ground.
On 19 April 2014 at around 3pm, I was standing outside one of my friends¡¯ room (he had proper room unlike my tent), when I heard a strange sound and a huge blast. I ran inside, grabbed a helmet and a bullet-proof jacket and ran towards the bunker. Within the two minutes it took me to reach the bunker there had been another three blasts. That was the moment I earnestly begged God to save my life. Later we found out that it had been a BM 21 rocket launcher and had made a large hole where it landed.
By that time, my contract was coming to an end so I left Bentiu the next day. The moment our flight took off, I said to my colleague next to me: ¡°Now that I think I am safe, I can tell my mom what I have been through.¡± Until then, I had not told my family anything.
The hope I had seen among the people when I first arrived in 2013 was no longer alive when I left in April 2014. I hope the situation is better now, and though I know a political consensus has not been reached yet, I hope their lives have become normal ? by their own standards. Nothing makes you value life more than when you see death from so near.
Would you like to share your story of working in the field? Email globaldevpros@guardian.co.uk with ¡®Field post¡¯ in the headline.
Join our community of development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP on Twitter.
Eric Harris (18) and Dylan Klebold (17) marched into the library of Columbine High School yesterday with guns and pipe bombs, demanding that "all jocks stand up. We're going to kill every one of you," said student Aaron Cohn.
One of them looked under a desk in the library and said "Peek-a-boo," then fired, Cohn said. Anyone who cried or moaned was shot again. One girl begged for her life, but a gunshot ended her cries.
Cohn said one killer put a pistol to his head but did not shoot him. Instead, he said, the shooter turned his attention to a black student, saying, "I hate niggers." Cohn heard three shots but couldn't see what happened.
The bodies lay crumpled in the schoolhouse where they were shot; officers delayed removing the corpses until later today because of possible booby traps.
Bombs were found in and around the school, including in two cars in the school parking lot. More than 11 hours after the shootings, a bomb on a timer blew up, but no one was injured.
At least 23 people were hospitalized, most of them with gunshot wounds. One girl suffered nine shrapnel wounds. At least nine victims were in critical or serious condition; one was in guarded condition.
The dead included students and at least one faculty member, said Superintendent Jane Hammond. Students and Denver media identified the gunmen as Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, both juniors at the school. The two exchanged shots with police and were later found dead in the library with self-inflicted gunshot wounds and bombs around their bodies, said sheriff's spokesman Steve Davis.
"It appears to be a suicide mission," said Sheriff John Stone. While the motive was unclear, several students said Harris and Klebold were members of a group calling itself the "Trenchcoat Mafia," outcasts who bragged about guns and bombs and hated blacks and Hispanics, as well as athletes. Police who searched Harris' home said they found bomb-making material. Harris and Klebold both had juvenile records in Jefferson County District Court, according to a district court clerk - they were implicated in a 1998 criminal trespass case. Klebold received a deferred sentence.
Sixteen-year-old Matt Good told the Denver Post that during the past year Harris had started wearing all black, spoke German, and was obsessed with anything German or about the Second World War. The local sheriff noted that yesterday was Adolf Hitler's birthday.
But some neighbours described Harris and Klebold as quiet boys - one said Klebold was a gifted and talented student who also took part in a fantasy baseball league. They said the Harris family moved in about two years ago and that the boy's father, Wayne, recently retired from the military. Harris may have taken his father's guns for the massacre, they said.
Littleton, a middle-class suburb of Denver with a population of 35,000, is the latest American community shocked by school violence. Since 1997, shootings have led to calls for stricter laws, tighter security and closer monitoring of troubled students. Two people were killed in an attack at a school in Pearl, Mississippi; three in West Paducah, Kentucky; five in Jonesboro, Arkansas, and two in Springfield, Oregon.
In Washington, President Bill Clinton's reaction was muted. He said intended to wait for the facts to emerge before taking any new steps to protect children in US schools. 'You know what we put out before,' he told reporters. 'You know the efforts we've made. And I just think that tonight we need to focus on the families that lost their kids, on the children that are wounded, on the grieving of the community.'
'We do know that we must do more to reach out to our children and teach them to express their anger and to resolve their conflicts with words, not weapons. And we do know we have to do more to recognize the early warning signs that are sent before children act violently,' he added.
The two gunmen, wearing fatigues and ankle-length black coats, opened fire in the parking lot around 11:30 a.m. MDT (1730 GMT) before entering the school cafeteria. Bullets ricocheted off lockers as students raced toward the exits.
Student Nick Foss saw one of the gunmen pull a sawed-off shotgun from under his coat. "Finally I started figuring out these guys shot to kill for no reason," Foss said. The gunman "didn't say anything. When he looked at me, the guy's eyes were just dead."
The killers fired as they walked into the cafeteria and continued shooting as they moved upstairs into the library. Cohn said he heard one girl begging for her life and then a bang. "They were laughing after they shot. It was like they were having the time of their life," he said.
Dozens of students hid in classrooms before escaping with the help of police in an armoured car. Others were trapped for hours while police commando teams searched for the gunmen and their bombs. Some students had called their parents on cellular phones from inside the building to whisper they were OK.
Hundreds of police officers from throughout the Denver area surrounded the school, which has 1,800 students. As TV images of the scene were broadcast nationwide, helicopter ambulances used a sports field as a landing pad, and officers in helmets and camouflage gear took cover behind squad cars.
Students who fled the building wept and held their hands above their heads while police frisked them. Many parents gathered at a nearby elementary school and answered questions from investigators, who were trying to identify some of the victims based only on what they were wearing.
A Cleveland police officer who stood on the hood of a car and fired his gun 49 times through the windshield at two unarmed passengers was on Saturday found not guilty on two counts of voluntary manslaughter.
Officer Michael Brelo was also found not guilty of felonious assault, and discharged. He remains on unpaid leave.
The federal Department of Justice announced a review of the decision. In a statement to which civil rights division head Vanita Gupta was one of three names attached, the DoJ said: ¡°We will now review the testimony and evidence presented in the state trial ¡¦ to collaboratively determine what, if any, additional steps are available and appropriate.¡±
Protests followed the verdict, as civic leaders called for calm.
¡°It is my expectation that we will show the nation that peaceful protest is a right,¡± said Mayor Frank Jackson, at an afternoon press conference. Jackson added that anyone, protester or police, who had ¡°a different agenda¡± would not be tolerated.
In court in the morning, Cuyahoga County judge John P O¡¯Donnell said prosecutors failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that bullets fired by Brelo were the cause of death of Malissa Williams and Timothy Russell, or that Brelo had no fear for his own life during the volley of gunfire that ended a high-speed car chase on 29 November 2012.
Regarding the shots fired from Brelo¡¯s gun, O¡¯Donnell said they could have been the ones causing death, but so could others fired by other officers before his shots from the hood of the vehicle.
¡°I cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt which of the fatal wounds he caused,¡± O¡¯Donnell said.
As far as Brelo¡¯s perception that he was in danger, and therefore justified in firing his weapon, O¡¯Connell said the prosecution only proved that Brelo¡¯s action may not have been in line with some of the department¡¯s procedural standards.
¡°Not conforming to the training, and maybe not appropriate for the circumstances, but not illegal,¡± the judge said of Brelo firing his last 15 shots from on top of the car hood, down into the passengers in the front seats.
¡°The verdict should be no cause for a civilized society to celebrate or riot,¡± O¡¯Donnell said in remarks preceding his lengthy reading of 10 pages of his 35-page verdict, in which he discussed the wounds suffered by Williams and Russell, which were indicated on two mannequins in court, and the views and actions of other police officers involved in the shooting.
After O¡¯Donnell delivered his verdict, some African American spectators in the courthouse shouted: ¡°No justice, no peace!¡±
About 40 protesters gathered outside the courthouse in downtown. The protest turned a little ugly as Brelo¡¯s attorney, Patrick D¡¯Angelo, made his way outside for TV interviews. The small crowd surrounded D¡¯Angelo and some screamed ¡°protector of killers¡± as he was escorted back into the courthouse by deputies.
Police quickly barricaded the roads around the courthouse, closing them to vehicle traffic but permitting people to protest in the street.
¡°This verdict was no surprise to the black community,¡± said one African American community activist outside the court house. ¡°The law is written so the police can get away with abusing people of color, and this is proof of how that works.¡±
Initially, protests seemed likely to remain peaceful. One city councilman, Jeff Johnson, told the Guardian: ¡°I would encourage everyone in Cleveland to hit the streets, and express your opinion if this decision outrages you.
¡°But rioting will do nothing for the cause of changing the judicial view of these cases of excessive force. We must show restraint.
¡°I believe this verdict is unreasonable, and I¡¯m sure members of many communities in Cleveland will think it is unreasonable. There is a court of popular opinion, and we must raise our voices in a peaceful way that this is not a standard of police behavior we will tolerate.¡±
Another councilman, Zack Reed, added: ¡°I¡¯m hoping Cleveland will be a model in how to handle decisions like this, and that everyone will agree to be calm and not bring any harm to the citizens of this city.¡±
Brelo¡¯s trial ended about three weeks ago, and was decided by a judge instead of a jury at the request of the defendant. The move allowed the decision to be made by a judge looking only at the strict legal interpretation of the case, rather than by a jury that might render a decision based more on emotion.
Sources have told the Guardian that O¡¯Donnell waited so long to issue his verdict in order to give the city time to prepare for any resultant civic unrest of the kind seen recently in Ferguson, Missouri, and Baltimore after cases involving deaths at the hands of police.
The judge picked a Saturday morning on a holiday weekend to announce the verdict, the sources said, to provide an extra day for law enforcement to calm the city, and also as a way to lessen problems that might be caused by high school students. In recent years, downtown Cleveland has experienced some acts of mob violence carried out by high school students ? in particular on St Patrick¡¯s Day this year.
Brelo, 31, joined the Cleveland police department in 2007, having served in the marine corps in Iraq. He was charged with two counts of voluntary manslaughter. Each count can carry a sentence of three to eight years in prison.
Brelo¡¯s trial resulted froma police chase on 29 November 2012, when Malissa Williams and Timothy Russell led police on a 20-minute pursuit that involved 60 police cars and about 100 police officers. The chase began when their car, a 1979 Chevy Malibu, apparently backfired as it passed police headquarters in downtown Cleveland. The noise was mistaken for a gunshot.
Williams, 30, and Russell, 43, were boxed into a middle-school parking lot when 13 Cleveland police officers fired 137 shots into the car in an 18-second volley. Brelo fired the most ? 49 shots total ? including 15 at the end of the barrage while standing on the hood of the car, aiming at the pair through the windshield. Even though a dozen other officers fired 88 bullets into the car, only Brelo was charged.
If Brelo was fearful that he or another officer or a bystander might get hurt, he was entitled to use deadly force.
The prosecution also had to prove that Brelo¡¯s actions led to the deaths of Williams and Russell, meaning the bullets fired from his gun were the ones that killed them. No forensic science experts could say with any certainty that any of Brelo¡¯s 49 bullets resulted in death.
The Brelo case caused widespread outrage and led to an investigation of the use of excessive force by the Cleveland police department. In February 2013, the Ohio attorney general, Mike DeWine, found that the chase and killing of Russell and Williams represented ¡°a systematic failure in the Cleveland police department¡±.
Last December, after a 21-month investigation sparked by the case, the then US attorney general Eric Holder released a report that found Cleveland police had engaged in a pattern and practice of excessive force, including unnecessary deadly force. The Department of Justice report alleged that the excessive force violated Cleveland citizens¡¯ constitutional rights, and was based on more than 600 incidents between 2012 and 2013.
Cleveland¡¯s mayor, Frank Jackson, has been in office for 10 years, during which time, according to a report in the Cleveland Plain Dealer, ¡°in more than 60 lawsuits, citizens accused officers of needlessly shooting at them, beating them during routine traffic stops, shocking them with Tasers while face-down on the ground in handcuffs or arresting them when they had committed no crime¡±.
Those lawsuits cost the city more than $8m to resolve, according to the report.
Adding to the Cleveland police department¡¯s problems is the ongoing investigation into the killing of 12-year-old Tamir Rice. The boy was holding a toy pellet gun when he was shot by police in a city park last November.
With expectations that a not guilty verdict might spark riots similar to those seen in Baltimore last month, Cleveland police and city leaders met various community groups in private. Neighborhood outreach teams included religious leaders, youth league coaches, business leaders, motorcycle club members and former gang members, in an effort to keep the peace regardless of the verdict.
Michael Brown, the unarmed teenager killed by a police officer in the Missouri city of Ferguson, was shot multiple times and finally felled by a mortal wound to the head, according to a preliminary autopsy and an account of the shooting provided by the officer, Darren Wilson.
The disclosures came on a night marred by shootings and clashes between protesters and police, the worst in eight days of turmoil, which terrified residents and left Ferguson resembling a war zone.
A violent altercation between protesters at around 9pm, which left a woman with a gunshot wound, triggered a swift response from police who had been preparing to enforce a curfew at midnight.
Officers fired multiple rounds of tear-gas and swept into the centre of Ferguson, prompting chaotic scenes as protesters and onlookers tried to flee. There were no immediate details about casualties.
Sunday¡¯s revelation of an autopsy report of the 9 August killing, which has polarised opinion across the US, threatened to inflame tensions further. Brown, 18, was shot at least six times, including twice in the head, according to a preliminary private autopsy performed on behalf of his family on Sunday, the New York Times reported.
One of the bullets entered the top of the skull, suggesting his head was bent forward when it struck and caused a fatal injury, according to Michael Baden, a former chief medical examiner for the City of New York. He flew to Missouri at the family¡¯s request to conduct the autopsy, which follows an earlier examination carried out for St Louis County, which is investigating the killing.
Baden said it was probably the last bullet to hit the teenager. Brown was also shot four times in the right arm. All bullets were fired into his front, the examiner concluded.
The absence of gunpowder on the body suggested the bullets were not fired from close range. That determination could change if there was gunshot residue on Brown¡¯s clothing, to which Baden did not have access, he told the New York Times.
The autopsy¡¯s revelaton that Brown was shot in the head mirrored Wilson¡¯s account of the disputed incident, when he encountered Brown walking in the middle of a street in Ferguson with a friend, Dorian Johnson.
Wilson has not spoken publicly but a friend of the family, who declined to be named, told the Guardian that the officer admits he shot Brown in the head. However, his version of events contradicts aspects of the accounts given by some other eyewitnesses, including Dorian Johnson.
There appears to be little dispute that an altercation took place when Wilson encountered Brown and Johnson, shortly after a robbery at a convenience store. Brown then made off, but quickly turned back.
In Wilson¡¯s version, Brown was moving towards the officer in a threatening manner when he was shot. The autopsy concludes that all the shots were fired from the front.
Wilson¡¯s account is that Brown continued to move towards him even after the first shots were fired, and did not stop until suffering a mortal wound to the head. ¡°He just kept coming,¡± the friend said, characterising Wilson¡¯s account.
The Department of Justice, which is leading a civil-rights investigation into the killing, on Sunday took the unusual step of ordering a federal medical examiner to conduct a third autopsy on Brown¡¯s body. A spokesman for Eric Holder, the attorney general, cited the ¡°extraordinary circumstances¡± of the case for the decision.
Both sides in what is becoming an increasingly incendiary and politicised story are likely to offer different interpretations: that Wilson fired in self-defence; or that six bullets showed excessive force.
Friends of Wilson and his girlfriend, Barbara Spradling, also a Ferguson police officer, have expressed concern about the racial and institutional politics involved, worrying that the charged environment may unduly influence the case.
In addition to concerns for their safety, friends of Spradling and Wilson believe his reputation has been unfairly tarnished by a rush to judgment from the media and some members of the public.
One friend of Spradling believes the legitimacy of any evidence supporting Wilson¡¯s version of events will be questioned by protesters.
Sunday night¡¯s mayhem further poisoned the toxic relationship between police and Ferguson residents. It also raise urgent questions about Governor Jay Nixon¡¯s decision on Saturday to declare a state of emergency and impose a midnight-to-5am curfew.
A coalition of civil rights groups condemned the move. The American Civil Liberties Union, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the Legal Defense and Education Fund and the Lawyers¡¯ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law said the order violated the constitutional right to free assembly.
The order fell short of legal requirements to define the area affected by the curfew, the groups said. ¡°People have a right to know when and where their conduct is lawful under all circumstances, but especially when the government is restricting activities that are protected by the first amendment,¡± their statement read. ¡°Restricting this most fundamental of all American values is not a solution to the problems in Ferguson.¡±
In St Louis, a crowd of about 150 people gathered in support of Wilson. Some wielded placards with messages defending the 28-year-old officer and his family, during the early-evening demonstration.
¡°He was doing his job,¡± said Kaycee Reinisch, 57, of Lincoln County, Missouri. ¡°And now because of public uproar in Ferguson, he is being victimised. He is being victimised by the whole city, the state and the federal government.¡± Reinisch said she had relations in law enforcement who would be ¡°frightened to do their jobs¡± if Wilson were punished for the incident.
Earlier on Sunday Brown¡¯s parents held a memorial service for their son at the Greater Grace Church. The veteran civil rights leader Al Sharpton told the packed congregation that the response to the death was a crucial test for US policing. ¡°This is the defining moment in this country. All over the world, the debate is how the rights of people are dealt with by the state,¡± he said.
Colorado awoke to its worst mass shooting since the Columbine massacre after at least 12 people were killed and 50 injured by a lone gunman wielding tear gas and firing randomly at cinema goers at the midnight premier of the Batman movie.
One traumatised eyewitness caught on camera soon after the shooting said: "There was gunfire, there were babies, there were kids, there was blood everywhere."
Among those caught up in the attack were a three-month-old baby who was treated in hospital and released, a child aged six and people aged 16 to 31 who were treated for exposure to noxious chemicals.
The gunman, named by law enforcement officials speaking on condition of anonimity as James Holmes, 24, entered one of the three cinemas showing The Dark Knight Rises at the multiplex cinema in Aurora, a suburb of Denver, at about 12.30am. He came in through a side exit, dressed in black and wearing a flack jacket and mask, and carrying a rifle and hand guns.
Several eyewitnesses said they had assumed he was a special effects installation arranged by the cinema to mark the international premier of the Batman film, which by that time had reached a dramatic action sequence with Anne Hathaway in a shoot-out on screen. Even when he flung a gas canister into the air above the audience, and fumes spread through auditorium after a loud bang, people thought it was a clever stunt.
Then he started shooting, first to the back of the room and then randomly at individuals as they tried to make a get-away down the aisles.
Chandler Brannon, 25, who had been watching the movie with his girlfriend, said that around 20 minutes into the movie he saw a smoke bomb go off and heard what sounded like fireworks.
He then realised that the noises he was hearing were gunshots.
"I told my girlfriend to just play dead," he said, adding that he never got a full view of the gunman. "All I could see was a silhouette."
Jennifer Seeger told NBC that she had told her friend: "We've got to get out of here. But then he shot people trying to go out the exits." She said the shooter made his way silently up the aisle, firing as he went.
Witness Shayla Roeder said she saw a young teenage girl on the ground bleeding outside the theater.
"She just had this horrible look in her eyes. ¡¦ We made eye contact and I could tell she was not all right," Roeder said.
A girl was struck in the cheek, another in the stomach. Salina Jordan told the Denver Post that it sounded like firecrackers until someone ran out screaming: "They're shooting out here!"
Naya Thompson said she thought the shooter had exploded two gas canisters. "It was like a tear gas. I was coughing and choking and I couldn't breathe."
Police officers arrested the suspect near a car behind the theater. When police found him, the shooter was carrying a knife, a rifle and a handgun. A further gun was later recovered from the theater.
Authorities said he was also wearing a bulletproof vest and there are reports that he also had a gas-mask.
"He did not resist, he did not put up a fight," a police spokesman Frank Fania said in relation to the suspect's apprehension.
Forensic experts later searched the shooter's apartment looking for explosives that he said he had left in the property. The building was evacuated as a precaution during the operation.
For the community of Denver, the shooting will have terrible echoes of the massacre at Columbine High School, just 15 miles away from Aurora. On 20 April 1999 two students, Eric Harris, 18 and Dylan Klebold, 17 opened fire in the school, killing 12 classmates and a teacher before committing suicide.
President Barack Obama was informed of the shooting in the early hours of the morning. In a statement from Palm Beach Florida, where he was due to campaign today, the president said he was "shocked and saddened by the horrific and tragic shooting in Colorado".
Federal and local law enforcement teams were doing everything they could to "suppot the people of Aurora in this extraordinary difficult time".
Obama added: "As we do when confronted by moments of darkness and challenge, we must now come together as one American family.
"All of us must have the people of Aurora in our thoughts and prayers as they confront the loss of family, friends, and neighbors, and we must stand together with them in the challenging hours and days to come."
Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney expressed his sadness over the "senseless violence" that had taken the lives of at least a dozen victims. "We are praying for the families and loved ones of the victims during this time of deep shock and immense grief," Romney added in a statement.
Warner Bros, the distributor of the Batman film, put out a statement extending its sympathies to families of the victims. Police chiefs around the country were reporting additional security measures outside cinemas showing The Dark Knight Rises to safeguard against copycat incidents.
The Queen Elizabeth hospital in Birmingham, where Malala Yousafzai will be treated for her injuries, is among the newest in Britain, and specialises in dealing with gunshot and head injuries, providing specialist care to members of the UK armed forces.
It houses the National Institute for Health Research Centre for Surgical Reconstruction and Microbiology, which provides a national lead in identifying effective resuscitation techniques, surgical care after multiple injuries or amputation, and new methods of fighting wound infections.
The hospital also houses the Royal Centre for Defence Medicine, whose 600 doctors, nurses, therapists and support staff work alongside NHS staff in treating military personnel, including those evacuated from Afghanistan, as well as civilians. Military staff wear their own uniforms, which vary depending on whether they are in the army, navy or RAF, although some wear a generic green uniform with rank insignia.
Work at the centre and what the Care Quality Commission standards watchdog has called "exemplary care" at the field hospital at Camp Bastion, in Afghanistan, is leading to extraordinary medical advances. Dealing with the complex injuries suffered by the military in roadside bombings as well as shootings is helping to develop new treatments and rehabilitation techniques for those who not long ago would have died from severe trauma, loss of blood and limbs, and burn injuries.
An 11-year-old American boy has been charged with killing his father's pregnant girlfriend with his hunting gun as she lay in bed at the family farmhouse in Pennsylvania.
Jordan Brown is alleged to have shot 26-year-old Kenzie Marie Houk, who was eight months pregnant, before catching the school bus on Friday morning, according to the Lawrence County district attorney, John Bongivengo.
Her family and friends said there had been tensions between her and the boy.
"There was an issue with jealousy," said Kenzie Marie's brother-in-law, Jason Kraner, 34.
Bongivengo said Jason was charged with criminal homicide and the criminal homicide of an unborn child and was being held in Lawrence County jail. A preliminary hearing is set for Thursday.
The case has highlighted growing concerns about children's access to firearms.
The fifth-grader was picked up from school on Friday by Pennsylvania state police after they found Kenzie Marie's body. Her four-year-old daughter had told tree cutters on the property that she thought her mother was dead, Bongivengo said.
On Saturday, Jordan told police he had seen a suspicious black truck, causing investigators to look into a false lead for about five hours.
Inconsistencies in Jason's description of the vehicle led police to re-interview the victim's seven-year-old daughter, who implicated the boy in the killing, the attorney said.
"She didn't actually eyewitness the shooting. She saw him with what she believed to be a shotgun and heard a loud bang," Bongivengo said. He said the shotgun was found in what police believed was the boy's bedroom.
The youth model 20-gauge shotgun, which is said to have belonged to Jordan, is designed for children and such weapons do not have to be registered.
Jordan's attorney, Dennis Elisco, said the evidence pointed to the gunshot wound being "consistent" with the boy's hunting gun, but he wanted to see stronger proof.
"I believe Jordan did not do this and I'm looking forward to seeing the physical evidence to see if it matches with what I think happened," he said after talking to the boy in jail.
Police said they had no motive for the shooting, and Bongivengo would not say whether the boy confessed.
"An 11-year-old kid, what would give him the motive to shoot someone?" Kenzie Marie's father, Jack, asked. "Maybe he was just jealous of my daughter and the baby and thought he would be overpowered."
Jack Houk said the boy and his father used to practise shooting behind their farmhouse and the pair enjoyed hunting together.
He said he did not know of any recent problems between the boy and his daughter, but there had been "some tension" in the beginning. Houk said his daughter had been working hard to forge a relationship with the boy.
A woman was killed and four other people shot in an incident in Texas that was initially feared to be the work of a gunman attacking in various locations.
Austin police were called to two incidents in the city¡¯s historic Sixth Street entertainment district within minutes of each other in the early hours of Sunday, prompting fears that a person was firing randomly.
The police put out a warning of an ¡°active shooter incident downtown¡±, telling people to stay away from the area. At a press conference later, however, the Austin police chief of staff, Brian Manley, said that had been ¡°based on the information we had at that time¡±.
¡°It was a very chaotic scene,¡± Manley said. ¡°A lot of people running in different directions with all the gunshots coming out.¡±
At 2.17am, police received a call saying a woman had been shot in Sixth Street and seven minutes later a call saying an individual had been assaulted with shots fired in Trinity Street, a few blocks away.
At the press conference, Manley said: ¡°At this time we do not believe nor are we classifying this as an active shooter. What we had was two separate incidents that occurred in very close proximity to each other both in location and time that made us initially believe it was an active shooter.¡±
He said the Sixth Street incident was believed to have begun after a disturbance between two individuals led one of them to shoot into the crowd.
A woman, believed to be in her 20s, died on the scene. Four other people were shot, three of them women believed to be in their 30s, who were taken to University Medical Center Brackenridge. The other person injured, a man, refused to be taken to hospital. Commander Mike Benavides of Austin-Travis County emergency services said the women had serious but non-life threatening injuries.
The gunman, believed to be a light-skinned black or Hispanic male, escaped,Manley said.
¡°As officers arrived, as you can imagine with this being shortly after 2am and the large crowds that we have on Sixth Street at this time, all the individuals leaving the bars, it was a very chaotic scene, a lot of people running in different directions with all the gunshots running out,¡± he said.
He praised the police response as ¡°fantastic¡±, saying they were on the scene immediately.
Austin police chief Art Acevedo said in a statement that his department was working to identify and arrest the person responsible for the shootings in Sixth Street, and urged people who had video of the shooting or the aftermath to send it to police via email.
Manley did not rule out that a suspect might be one of the people transported to the hospital.
¡°We have multiple individuals, witnesses, that we are currently interviewing,¡± Manley said. ¡°We had one individual who was initially noted as a person of interest, however that person¡¯s status at this point is undetermined.¡±
Manley said the second incident involved a dispute in a car park in which a man pulled out and fired a weapon before being ¡°taken down¡± by other people who observed the disturbance.
The gunman was taken to hospital for injuries incurred while he was disarmed but no one else was injured. Benavides said the gunman was believed to be in his 20s and had not suffered life-threatening injuries.
Manley appealed for people to forward any video they had of the Sixth Street incident to police.
A video posted on Twitter purporting to be from the scene of the shooting showed people running and screaming after shots were heard. Sam Vedamanikam, who posted the footage, tweeted: ¡°I think it was a fight. Police ran immediately into it. Props to the police. We ran to 7th Street to get away from 6th.¡±
? This article was amended on 1 August 2016. An earlier version described Brian Manley as Austin¡¯s police chief. He is the police chief of staff.
More than 1,500 people are thought to have been injured ? three of them seriously ? after Juventus fans watching the Champions League final stampeded in a Turin square after mistaking firecrackers for an explosion or gunshots.
Thousands of people had gathered in Piazza San Carlo on Saturday night to watch Juventus play Real Madrid on giant TV screens. During the second half of the match loud bangs led to a sudden rush in the middle of the crowd, causing a surge that flung people against barriers.
Many were trampled as people began to run out of the centre of the square, screaming in fear. The stampede may been started by the explosion of a loud firecracker that was mistaken for a bomb, some witnesses suggested.
¡°I heard an explosion, which must have been a huge firecracker,¡± a witness told La Stampa, one of Italy¡¯s daily newspapers. However, another suggested it may have been the result of a security barrier falling over.
¡°They shouted, there¡¯s a bomb, evacuate the square,¡± a member of the audience told the paper. ¡°So we ran away. There were people on the ground, and blood and glass everywhere.¡±
One of the fans, who was caught next to the barriers, said: ¡°I felt I was being lifted up. It was terrible.¡±
Although initially police said 200 people needed hospital treatment, the Italian news agency Ansa later put the figure at 1,527, using hospital tallies.
Most of the injured were treated for cuts and light contusions, but three people, including a seven-year-old boy, were reportedly in a serious condition.
¡°The root cause of this was panic,¡± said the local official Renato Saccone. ¡°We¡¯ll have to wait a while to understand what triggered it.¡±
In a statement, local authorities said the crowd ¡°was seized by panic and by the psychosis of a terror attack¡± fearing that the loud noise was caused by attackers.
Shoes and bags littered the ground in the aftermath of the stampede, and people were seen limping and searching desperately for friends and relatives. Police have set up an information point to help people find their loved ones, and are now investigating what caused the panic.
¡°I saw the entire piazza went in the direction next to the screen to escape, all in a panic,¡± Brian Hendrie, an Associated Press reporter, said. ¡°They ran, fell on the ground on the glass.¡± He said some reported having heard a small explosion, others a shot. ¡°I heard five or six different versions. It sparked a panic.¡±
Within minutes, dazed fans in Juve¡¯s black-and-white jerseys returned and milled about the piazza amid the broken bottles and rubbish littering the cobblestones, with the match largely forgotten.
Some injuries occurred after a railing around the entrance to the underground parking beneath the square gave way under the weight of the crush.
Local media cited older Juventus fans saying the panic had evoked painful memories of the 1985 Heysel disaster in which 39 mostly Italian fans died when fans were crushed by a collapsing wall before the start of that year¡¯s European Cup final, against Liverpool.
The mayor of Turin, Chiara Appendino, who had returned from watching the Champions League legends match in Cardiff, held a meeting with police on Sunday morning.
She was then due to visit the local hospital where the seven-year-old boy was being treated. His condition, which includes injuries to his head and torso, was described as serious but stable.Following the stampede, Appendino tweeted: ¡°I¡¯m shocked at what happened in Piazza San Carlo in Turin. We¡¯re monitoring the situation minute by minute.¡±
Three women aged between 60 and 80 have sustained gunshot wounds after two New South Wales police officers fired at a man who was allegedly armed with a knife in a crowded mall.
The actions of the two officers will be subject to a critical incident review after the three women and the man thought to be wielding the knife were shot.
A NSW police assistant commissioner, Denis Clifford, said on Monday it was ¡°alarming¡± the three women had sustained injuries but said the two police officers who discharged their firearms had reacted to a fast-developing situation.
¡°Police had to make a very critical decision on the actions they took,¡± Clifford told reporters at the scene.
Clifford said the drama unfolded within seconds and an investigation would examine whether a Taser could have been used.
The shooting took place just before midday on Thursday at the Hornsby organic food markets in Florence street, outside the Hornsby Westfield shopping centre, after reports of a man armed with a knife.
A statement from NSW police said four people had been injured and taken to hospital. Clifford said the three women and the man who allegedly wielded the knife were all in a stable condition.
Footage posted by the photographer David Henry on Twitter shows several NSW police officers surrounding a person lying on the ground. The officers appear to have their weapons drawn.
Henry posted that one shot had been fired and three people were injured.
According to the Nine Network, a man had been ¡°ranting¡± in the outdoor area. Police approached and, soon after, two officers ¡°discharged¡± their firearms.
The man was shot in the stomach and arm, Nine said, and three female bystanders suffered leg injuries.
Magdy Abdalla, from the Java Lava Cafe on Florence Street, told Australian Associated Press he had heard gunshots and immediately fell to the floor. ¡°I told all of the customers just stay on the floor,¡± he said. ¡°I was scared. I just heard the shooting.
¡°I saw some people running and I just had a look. I found three older ladies on the floor bleeding, one injured in the leg, one in the arm and the other one maybe in the back.¡±
Abdalla also reported seeing a young, skinny man, aged in his early 20s, lying on the ground. ¡°Police officers came in one minute,¡± he said.
Helen Wong, from the nearby Pho Ngon restaurant, said she had seen bodies on the ground and police had cordoned off the area.
Australian Associated Press contributed to this report
According to legend, the Royal Shakespeare Company once posted a warning to audiences: "This production contains real fire." Whether the promise was fulfilled in all senses, it certainly set a trend. Theatres' entrances are now festooned with cautions, some addressing health and safety issues, others more concerned with matters of taste and decency. As illuminating as what managements choose to warn against is what they choose not to.
So, earlier this year, Sam West's revival in Sheffield of The Romans in Britain alerted audiences to stage smoke, but not to the nudity and rape that are the play's most notorious feature. By contrast, the Oxford Stage Company's current reworking of Paradise Lost does warn about strobe lights and "scenes of nudity", but doesn't mention the smoke (which is, in fact, likely to be a water-based haze effect, more accurately described as "fog"). Notices outside Fuerzabruta at the Roundhouse in Camden mention strobe effects too; but, amid a massive, exhilarating and alarming assault on the senses from all directions, I don't see how you're supposed to pick them out.
For me, the wording of these notices has often been a bone of contention. Certainly, I have no objection to warning audiences about flashing lights, which can cause or provoke epilepsy. This summer I have two adaptations in revival (Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde opening at the Oregon Shakespeare Festival, and Nicholas Nickleby in Chichester), in both of which the public is warned - uncontroversially enough - about the use of smoke and haze. But from there on in, the questions become knottier. I remember very clearly when, in the mid-1990s, I first saw a warning against on-stage smoking in an earlier American production of Jekyll and Hyde - little thinking that, 10 years later, the only cigarettes permissible on Scottish stages would be the ones with fake glowing ends you buy from joke shops.
In 1994, I joined battle with the Other Place, the Royal Shakespeare Company's then-small Stratford theatre, over what I saw as a much more important issue. We were debating warning notices for my play Pentecost. Perhaps because the audience was so close to the stage, the Other Place always took unusual care to make its audiences aware of what they were letting themselves in for. As far back as 1987, there were cautions about nudity (in that case, the impressive figure of Brian Cox, in Doug Lucie's Fashion). Just before Pentecost, the Other Place felt obliged to mention that a light dusting of snow which fell on the front row during a production of Henry VI Part Three was a harmless vegetable substance, posing no danger to clothing. In my case, however, they wanted to warn about explosions and gunfire.
I had a general and a particular concern about warning against the considerable (but contained) pyrotechnics that occur towards the end of Pentecost. The universal problem with drawing audiences' attention to upcoming gunfire is that, as soon as anything vaguely cylindrical appears on the stage, people start sucking their teeth; in this case, they'd be wincing for an hour and a half. The particular problem with Pentecost is that, if you know there's gunfire coming, there comes a point when you know how the play is going to end.
The management accepted that argument, but knew the likely level of complaints they'd have to deal with (from a highly articulate and potentially litigious cohort) if they didn't warn about the effects, so negotiations began. It was when I suggested that we might obscure what actually happened in the play by generalisation ("Pentecost includes effects"), equivocation ("Pentecost may contain gunfire"), or camouflage ("Pentecost contains some but not all of the following ...") that I realised we might be looking at this thing the wrong way round. Far from warning too much, might we be warning too little?
If the audience were indeed entitled to know about elements that might alarm, distress or offend them, why should this be restricted to effects? No show is perfect, and shouldn't managements alert the public to things they really do have a right to know about, such as dicky casting, gloomy lighting and cheapskate design? If the audience needs to be alerted to liquid droplets or harmless vegetable substances, shouldn't they also know about creaky exposition, wonky plotting or one-dimensional characters? ("This production contains significant longueurs towards the beginning of act two.") And if warning of gunfire and explosions gives away the ending, shouldn't the public be informed when plays don't have one - or have three?
The point I'm making (and have made) is not entirely satirical. There are serious conceptual problems with the cult of warning. First, what you find offensive might not be shocking to me, and vice versa. When two lecturers from the Mormon university Brigham Young in Utah rang the Young Vic theatre, to which Pentecost transferred, to ask if there was anything in the evening likely to discommode a group of fervent young American Christians, the box office mentioned the loud bangs, but not a naked man. To borrow terms from the new, descriptive form of film classification, my "mildly scary scenes" may be your "strong bloody violence" (and The Da Vinci Code's "moderate flagellation" your selling point or my last straw). The vocabulary becomes even more questionable when it deals with emotional anticipation: one person's "mild peril" may very well be another's "menace". For many years, I went to the theatre with a woman who, knowing the putting-out of Gloucester's eyes was on its way, would shut her eyes for Lear's dividing of the kingdom.
The new film classification system dramatises a second problem for all forms of warning: it muddies the distinction between what's true and what's pretend. For years, the Radio Times has informed its readers when broadcast movies feature nudity, swearing, sex scenes, violence or drug abuse. Of course, there is no real violence, or drug use, or sex, at least in front of the camera - but there is real nudity and people actually swear. More complicatedly, the actors in Spike Lee's Bamboozled are actually making "racial comments" (as the warning threatens), but they are doing so as actors playing characters, which is not the same as if they were saying exactly the same words in a bar. (This distinction is at its nicest when racial abuse overlaps with transgressive language, as in using the word "nigger".)
As yet, theatre warnings haven't become sufficiently detailed to confuse the actual with the represented. Apart from quantifiable matters such as nudity, theatres tend to use euphemistic phrases like "adult content" or "scenes of an explicit nature"; David Harrower's Blackbird, about underage sex, was billed as containing "sensitive subject matter". But behind all warnings - whether about content or sensation - lie presumptions that go beyond health and safety into more contestable areas of consumer protection. Chiefly, the assumption that seeing a film or a play is like eating a meal, in which you must have sight of the ingredients before sitting down to eat; that, above all else, the audience should be protected from surprise.
The battle for the unexpected has probably been lost in film and television, where the metaphors for swearing exhaust thesauruses (from "bad", "rich", "frank" and "salty" via "earthy", "strong" and "colourful" to "uncompromising" and "unrestrained"). The language of consumer protection is perhaps appropriate to a mass-entertainment medium that invades your living room; apologising for an unusually violent episode of Casualty, the then BBC head of drama serials insisted that "with programmes like Casualty, we cannot break trust with our audience. They should not be surprised by what they see."
But what is understandable in television or film should not seep into a medium whose great virtue is that it is seen by a minority who choose to go out and find it, and who have learned to expect and value works that don't always restrict themselves to what it says on the tin. Yes, of course, draw attention to effects that might have harmful medical consequences. But retain the impetus that led an American theatre director, wearied of warnings, to post a notice promising (or threatening) that: "Something May Happen".
¡¤ Nicholas Nickleby opens at the Chichester Festival Theatre on Thursday. Box office: 01243 781312.
Sunrise Hospital¡¯s emergency room was already full at about 10pm on 1 October when a police officer dropping off an accident victim received a call on his radio announcing: ¡°Shots fired.¡±
Doctor Kevin Menes and nurse Rhonda Davis looked up from their charts. ¡°Is this for real?¡± Menes asked. A series of gunshots crackled through the officer¡¯s radio in automatic bursts. It sounded like a combat zone. As he ran out, the officer said, ¡°That¡¯s the Route 91 concert.¡±
Immediately, Menes realized there would be hundreds if not thousands of victims, and Sunrise ? Las Vegas¡¯s largest trauma center and the hospital nearest to the site of the country music festival ? would probably receive the most.
He and Davis started to prepare. Menes contacted house supervisor Kat Comanescu, who then summoned all available nurses to the ER to help move or discharge patients. Davis requested crash carts and gurneys.
With only four ER doctors and one trauma surgeon on shift at the time, a mass casualty incident alert went out to bring in day-shift doctors, nurses and support staff.
On a typical day, Sunrise receives 20 trauma patients, but in the coming hours they would see approximately 200, including 124 people with gunshot wounds, the first of which would arrive within 15 minutes.
The staff waited with a line of stretchers and wheelchairs in Sunrise¡¯s ambulance bay as the sirens grew closer and louder. The plan was to separate patients into triage zones based on whether each person had seconds, minutes or hours to live, then stabilize or resuscitate them in preparation for surgery.
Everyone who was there that night described the blood and chaos, but also shared oddly uplifting stories of teamwork, humanity and grit. The Guardian interviewed 10 Sunrise staff members ? here are their experiences.
The first thing Menes did was get a police radio from his car. As well as being an ER physician, he is a medic for the Swat team, and listening to the Las Vegas Metropolitan police channel he began to grasp the scope of the tragedy. Menes gathered the four other ER doctors on shift, and they agreed that Menes would handle lead triage. That meant organizing patients for nurses and physicians who would focus on blood, intubation, chest tubes and everything else needed before surgery.
Menes told secretaries to prep all 24 operating rooms and call every surgeon and anesthesiologist. ¡°The surgery department is really what¡¯s going to save people¡¯s lives,¡± he told the Guardian. ¡°As ER doctors we bring people back to life and keep them alive for a short time, but surgeons are the ones who work the miracles. They¡¯re the ones who get the bleeding to stop and continue to get them better over next days and weeks, and eventually get them home.¡±
All available gurneys and wheelchairs were taken out to the ambulance bay, where non-ER staff would wheel patients in. They set up and waited. ¡°At about that time I was out on the driveway,¡± Menes recalled. ¡°You could hear it in the distance. You could hear the sirens coming soft initially, then getting louder and louder. The first cars that came were police cruisers. They can run red lights and had filled up with as many patients as they could.¡±
There is a textbook way to handle a mass casualty surge. Patients are given colored tags based on whether they have seconds or minutes to live (red), an hour or so (yellow), are unlikely to die (green), or have died (black). But to save time, Menes designated the four trauma bays as red, orange, yellow and green, inventing an extra severity level and skipping black ? those he believed to be dead would go to the red tag area so a second doctor could assess them in case Menes was wrong. Those who had died went to a temporary morgue in the endoscopy room.
It was a plan he had developed through studying the hospital¡¯s layout and the city¡¯s vulnerability. ¡°It¡¯s an open secret that we have a lot of crowds here in Las Vegas and there is always the potential for something like this to happen. For years I¡¯d been thinking about what I¡¯d do. I never said anything to anyone though because I didn¡¯t want them thinking I was crazy.¡±
After 150 people had been brought in, a nurse came out to the ambulance bay to say, ¡°Menes, they need you inside; they¡¯re getting behind.¡± He went to help stabilize or resuscitate people who were near death, while a trauma surgeon decided who would go into the operating room next. At one point Menes told nurses to take every unit of O-negative from the blood bank and fill their pockets with the intubation drugs to save the precious time it normally takes to fill out paperwork and use digital devices that track supplies. ¡°These are complete no-nos in nursing ? carrying drugs in pockets that aren¡¯t accounted for,¡± Menes admitted. ¡°But we had to do it to save patients¡¯ lives, and it worked.¡±
After 30 minutes, more staff showed up, additional operating rooms were opened, and after an hour more surgeons and doctors arrived. ¡°We were getting more and more patients out of the ER and into life-saving surgeries. This dance continued on for hours, and when everything was said and done, at 5am, it was like a ghost town. Almost everybody had been taken care of.¡±
Sixteen people of at least 200 patients seen that night died in their care, but during the first six hours the trauma team performed 28 surgeries to stop internal bleeding, and 67 operations in the first 24 hours.
More than 100 physicians and 200 nurses had come in.
¡°As a medical community we came together. But it wasn¡¯t just us. This happened all over the [Las Vegas] Valley, and in a smaller way this happens every night all over the world, 365 days a year.¡±
¡°We actually got a few minutes¡¯ heads-up quicker than anyone else because that officer just happened to be standing in our ER,¡± recalled Davis. ¡°It kind of took a while to process what was really going on. Hearing a barrage of bullets was shocking ? I was stunned.¡± After worrying about friends at the show her ¡°nurse brain¡± kicked in. ¡°I thought: oh my goodness, this is going to be huge.¡±
She helped notify doctors and surgeons. They started getting the trauma bays ready, which required moving non-critical patients to other areas of the hospital. Emergency dispatchers for Clark County, which contains Las Vegas, usually estimate how many people each hospital will receive, but this time all they could do was stress: ¡°You will get a lot of patients.¡±
¡°Even then I didn¡¯t quite get the grand scale of what it would be,¡± Davis recalled. ¡°It¡¯s hard to imagine that you¡¯re going to get hundreds of patients in minutes.¡±
This first wave arrived in police cars and private vehicles. She saw a young man with a gunshot wound to his leg, and seconds later the most critical patients started coming in, covered in blood. The most critical cases were gunshot wounds to the head, chest and stomach. Some of the patients did not have a pulse.
¡°We were trying to do CPR, putting chest tubes in, all of the life-saving measures that you would do,¡± she said. ¡°We get patients like this all the time, but maybe two at a time at most. You do all these steps to try to save their life. At this moment we had several who needed all these life-saving critical interventions at the same time. We went patient to patient as quickly as possible, trying to help save them. I wasn¡¯t thinking. You just kind of do. Quickly it turned into a sea of blood and patients.¡±
Nurses usually get assigned patients to care for through their shifts, but in this case ¡°you literally did whatever you could to whatever patient¡±, she recalled. The four trauma bay rooms typically hold six patients in total, yet each one was being used for four or five people, and there were more in the halls.
She recalled receiving a young female who had been shot in the chest. With every square inch of the trauma bay taken, Davis and an anesthesiologist worked on her in the hall. He was trying to put a chest tube in, because she wasn¡¯t breathing, and when they could not detect a pulse Davis started doing CPR immediately. ¡°I was leaning up on top of the gurney doing chest compressions, trying to save this poor girl¡¯s life, and there¡¯s just blood coming out of her chest from the wound.¡±
At one point Davis looked up and saw three more patients being moved into the hallway. Doctors and nurses were doing the exact same things for them. There was blood all over the floor.
Unfortunately, the patient she was working on could not be saved. Davis had to move on very quickly to the next patient: another young female in the same situation.
Not a day goes by without Davis thinking about that night. ¡°Some moments during the day I¡¯m completely fine, then I¡¯ll hear something or see something and the memory of that scene in the ER will pop in my mind. It¡¯s very vivid still.¡±
When she received the first Mass Casualty Incident alert, Sondereker turned on the news and saw nothing. She called her unit and was told: ¡°There¡¯s blood everywhere. Get in here now.¡±
While driving in she heard that 75 ambulances had been dispatched to the Strip, which was ¡°beyond comprehension¡±, she said. ¡°That¡¯s never happened before.¡±
Ambulances flew past as she drove in, and while turning into Sunrise, pickup trucks cut her off; she heard injured people crying in their flatbeds. ¡°In 35 years in medicine I¡¯ve worked in ambulance, EMS, trauma and helicopter crews. I¡¯ve seen burn ward devastation, but nothing like this.¡±
The victims arrived in cars, trucks, rideshares, police SUVs and of course ambulances, which instead of the usual one patient would transport six to eight at a time.
She too mentioned a ¡°sea of blood¡±: ¡°I¡¯ve never seen this amount of trauma in a few hours come through the door. The bullet wounds were the size of your nail bed, but the devastation those bullets caused in the human body was catastrophic. People could be talking with a small wound in their chest then be gone within seconds.
¡°The night flew so fast,¡± she said. ¡°You directed it, but it was surreal how things just happened; the flow was amazing. We¡¯d call for more stretchers and recliners and they¡¯d appear. The ER was full, so we moved people up and discharged from the top floors. In all the chaos was a calmness I can¡¯t describe because everyone was working their hearts out. That¡¯s one reason it was successful ? a camaraderie and teamwork like I¡¯ve never experienced in my life.¡±
She added: ¡°Hospitals have an option to divert [patients]. EMS kept asking me, ¡®how many more can you take?¡¯ I kept saying 10 more. It was an eyeball thing ? like where are we at? How many have I moved to cardio, to ICU, to surgery?¡±
Within an hour, 100 physicians and 100 nurses had arrived to help. ¡°I¡¯m from small-town Iowa; I¡¯ve seen camaraderie, but nothing like Las Vegas has put out in the past few weeks. The way they came together was heroic ? concierges helping people in, nurses¡¯ assistants holding hands, even the patients who said ¡°take care of those who are hurt worse. I¡¯m good.¡± It wasn¡¯t an ER of screaming. There was a calmness, because people were being taken care of.¡±
Sanguinet had to wait for her mother to come to watch her kids before she could get to Sunrise at 4am. The hospital was on lockdown and the halls were quiet. ¡°The fear and anguish was palpable,¡± she said. ¡°Everyone had the same look of shock.¡±
At that hour victims¡¯ families were also trickling in, some from out of state. Sanguinet went to the family resource center to help provide food, blankets and emotional support. Victims who had already been discharged from the ER were interspersed with families, holding each other¡¯s hands. ¡°People swirled around us,¡± she recalled, ¡°because they saw a badge and saw us taking names. It definitely put my skills to a test. I tried to set aside my own emotions as a parent, but obviously I¡¯m still human, so as I¡¯m walking and doing my job, I¡¯m also crying.¡±
She and two colleagues took it upon themselves to search for people. They photographed images from the families¡¯ cellphones and walked floor to floor, in some cases scrutinizing victims¡¯ tattoos or piercings. ¡°A lot of people unfortunately had issues where they weren¡¯t recognizable. You also look different in a hospital than when you¡¯re on the street smiling and happy.¡±
If a victim was alive and could be touched, staff immediately ran to the family to bring them to their side. But if the person was in the morgue, it was more complicated. Sanguinet personally matched eight or nine fatally wounded victims to their family members, a bittersweet experience. She delivered the news with a team that included clergy, medical staff and a case manager. ¡°I was there for the comforting part.¡±
A couple of days later, one of those parents called to see if her late daughter¡¯s boots had been found ? the family wanted to bury their daughter in her favorite outfit. Very few patients¡¯ belongings were at Sunrise ? a lot of loose items fell off or were torn away at the site. But at the bottom of the ER¡¯s storage box were the young woman¡¯s boots in a bag.
¡°I went to package them,¡± Sanguinet said. ¡°I took them out of the bag and saw they were covered in blood, dirt, and filth from the event. I¡¯m a mom. I have kids, and God forbid this would ever happen to me, I wouldn¡¯t want that to come back. I wouldn¡¯t want that reminder. I closed my door, I put something on the floor, and I sat there for two hours scrubbing those boots. A co-worker brought me a tool to help clean the soles.
¡°It was really a cathartic time for me to sit and reflect on everything that had happened. It brings home the fact that Las Vegas is my home now, and Sunrise hospital is my home now. I know that that mom is grateful that I took the time; for me it was a bit of closure to know that even out of tragedy you could do something to make a difference in an outcome that was so horrible.¡±
As a former trauma nurse, Comanescu knew exactly what was needed when Menes called saying: ¡°Something has happened at the Mandalay Bay,¡± the hotel from which the killer shot into the crowd. Her ER experience also allowed her to stay calm. ¡°I was thinking we needed manpower, space and supplies if a lot of people are coming. Our hospital was almost full.¡±
She broadcast to intensive care and telemetry units: ¡°Send all your available nurses to the ER.¡± Less critical patients needed to be moved out of trauma bays. Each department was also instructed to keep one ¡°crash cart¡±, or mobile cabinet, and these were rolled to the ER, their trays full of chest tubes, drugs and other life-saving supplies. They were in high demand when the ER became overrun with gunshot wound victims as patient after patient needed to be stabilized and intubated for emergency surgery.
¡°They were amazing,¡± Comanescu says of her staff. ¡°People were just coming to help, bringing all these supplies. The fact that people came from home and opened spaces that weren¡¯t open ¡¦ That night will stay with me for the rest of my life.¡±
Parish ran full speed pushing crash carts to the ER. They are heavy machines, and to keep supplies flowing she would sprint back and forth between the pharmacy and the ER throughout the night. A nursing student, once the ER was stocked with drugs, she told the charge nurse: ¡°There are limited things I can do, but I can help.¡± So many patients were in danger of bleeding out that she helped assess wounds, apply tourniquets, place IVs and monitor vital signs to notify doctors when patients crashed, until on-call staff nurses arrived.
¡°Some of the nurses from upstairs were traumatized,¡± she recalled. ¡°They¡¯ve seen patients pass before, but on a scale this size it¡¯s overwhelming.¡±
She helped colleagues focus on a checklist: assess and if necessary pack the wounds ? stopping the bleeding came first. And she helped victims call their families. ¡°There were people who couldn¡¯t operate their phones because they had blood in their eyes, were in shock, or had lost their phones. I let them use mine, and it¡¯s been a little hard now. I have families contacting me to say thank you even though their people didn¡¯t make it.¡±
By that time the staff was operating with mechanical efficiency, she said.
¡°Everybody was doing exactly what they needed to do to help as many people as they could. At that point I was in awe ¡¦ Ever since I started nursing school, the human race has been declining and hating on each other. I was debating whether I wanted to be a nurse. But when I looked around, I was like, this is what it¡¯s about: saving people. We were the helpers. That was the most memorable moment. Yeah, there was a lot of trauma happening, but at the same moment humanity was happening and it was amazing.¡±
¡°A lot of mass casualty alerts end up not significant, or false alarms,¡± said Fisher. ¡°But when I first pulled in it was an unbelievable sight. I got a pit in my stomach walking up because I knew something huge happened. There were multiple Metro vehicles, ambulances pulling in, nurses bringing out multiple gurneys to take people in stretchers from private vehicles.¡±
Two other surgeons were already in and three more were en route. Fisher went to the operating room where the first patient was on the table, prepped and draped. The anesthesiologist came in while Fisher located the wounds. He started operating. The key difference from a normal night, apart from the sheer volume of patients, was that the wounds were from a rifle, which is more serious because the rounds have a higher velocity than handgun bullets.
Their assembly-line approach worked ¡°fantastically well¡±, he said. ¡°Patients didn¡¯t have to wait to be operated on. We used all 24 operating rooms. All the staff came in right away, and that made a huge difference.¡±
Fisher operated on five people during a 24-hour shift. In between, he helped coordinate where patients would go and who would be next while performing triage. Everyone was in the zone, and the gravity of the mass shooting did not hit him until he went home the next night and his dogs smelled and licked the blood on his shoes. He put them in the trash.
At first, Szymanski experienced the night¡¯s trauma as a concertgoer. She and her husband were about to leave the Route 91 festival when the gunfire started. They believed they were hearing the sound of firecrackers. Security officers screamed that people should turn around and take cover, so they ducked into a bar with a roof overhead. They ran out in between shots, and she called her hospital to tell them what was happening. As they got away, they passed injured people resting against dumpsters, and Szymanski asked them: ¡°Are you OK?¡±
¡°Honestly, it felt very debilitating,¡± she recalled, ¡°because I¡¯m a non-clinical member of our team.¡± All she could do was help Sunrise prepare.
Showing up in her concert T-shirt and shorts, she turned the auditorium into a waiting room for victims¡¯ families. There, she gave people in blood- or dirt-stained clothes fresh outfits and handed cellphone chargers out, got the cafe open to provide coffee, and began working with case managers to help find missing loved ones. ¡°Going back and forth between the war zone was unlike anything I¡¯ve ever seen, but the patients were so wonderful. Many of them laying on gurneys in the ER were saying, ¡®No I¡¯m not that bad, go to work on them not me¡¯.¡±
The next day she managed a massive influx of food and water donations and brought in therapy dogs. Between five and 12 golden retrievers would visit Sunrise over the next few weeks, interacting with families, patients and staff. ¡°My phone was blowing up with names of people who needed fuzzy love. It made a big difference.¡±
Brown was part of the team that moved people upstairs from the ER, and then came back down to help triage the emergency cases. ¡°It was difficult,¡± she said. ¡°We¡¯re not used to being the first line, per se. I had to revert back to training and try to think of basic things that needed to be done.¡±
When she returned to the ICU at 7am, she cared for patients whom she had helped stabilize downstairs who had now gone through life-saving surgeries. In the weeks that followed, she watched them further improve. ¡°Some people we thought might not wake up, or talk or walk again were able to get up and move. From everything we saw that night to a week later the progress was amazing.¡±
Her most vivid memory, though, was of a patient who had arrived at the ER before the shooting, an older blind woman who asked to leave. ¡°She couldn¡¯t see what was going on in the ER at all, but she could sense it, and hear it obviously. She had a daughter in town who¡¯d gladly take her home, she said. In the middle of everything that was going on, when she came up to ask me that, it was touching. She was realizing she didn¡¯t need to be in our busy ER for what she had at that exact moment. It kind of stuck. There were other victims who were the same way after that. You start to see all that good from people who¡¯ve gone through something traumatic, and it keeps you going for all the ones who aren¡¯t able to do that.¡±
¡°As a level two trauma center we see all sorts of trauma, from stabbings to gunshots, to car accidents,¡± said Sklamberg, speaking in front of signed placards from medical staff in Orlando, San Bernardino, Denver, Boston and Newtown. ¡°We drill and we prepare on a very regular basis, but nothing could have prepared us for this event in terms of the quantity of patients that came. Over 120 gunshot victims came into Sunrise over a two-hour period of time ? unprecedented numbers in the history of the US. But the preparation, the drilling we do, gave us the foundation upon which to provide that care to all the patients who came in.
A gang that lured police to a pub at the height of last summer's riots before opening fire on officers and even the force helicopter has been given sentences of up to 30 years.
More than 40 men, mostly wearing masks or hoods, firebombed the Bartons Arms pub in Aston as the civil unrest spread from London to Birmingham in August last year.
Birmingham crown court heard that the gang attacked the pub to draw police into the area and once officers arrived fired at least 12 shots from at least four handguns both at officers and at the police helicopter in what the judge described as a concerted and potentially catastrophic attack.
"The purpose of all this was not to loot or to steal," said Judge William Davis. "Nor was it mindless vandalism. The purpose, the common purpose, was to behave in such a way that the police would come to the scene and then to attack the police."
Six men were sentenced on Thursday at the end of a six-week trial ? including Nicholas Francis, 26, who was sentenced to 30 years and was described by the judge as "clearly a dangerous man".
Jermaine Lewis, 27, was jailed for 23 years, Tyrone Laidley, 20, was also jailed for 23 years while Renardo Farrell, 20, and Wayne Collins, 25, were both jailed for 18 years.
A 17-year-old, who can be named as Amirul Rehman after the judge lifted an order, was jailed for 12 years. Francis, Lewis, Laidley, Farrell, and Collins were convicted of riot, reckless arson and possession of a firearm with intent to endanger life.
Rehman was found guilty of riot and firearms possession with intent.
Davis said: "The intention was to endanger life. Although no physical injury was suffered, that was wholly a matter of luck. Had the police helicopter been struck, the consequences could have been catastrophic. There may have been no physical injury to a police officer, but the damage to the wellbeing of the city of Birmingham caused by an armed gang prepared to act in this way was grave. It is very difficult to conceive a case of this type more serious than this one."
The gang began its attack on the evening of 9 August, smashing windows and throwing chairs and tables onto the pavement. The court heard that some entered the pub with petrol bombs while others threw bottles and bricks at a passing police car.
When large numbers of police arrived they were pelted with bricks, steel tubes and furniture before officers heard gunshots and were forced to take cover before being given the order to retreat for their own safety.
The court heard police realised they were being shot at when they heard the windows of the building behind them being smashed by gun fire.
Shortly afterwards the gang ran off and at one point a member of the group aimed a handgun at the police helicopter and fired a shot. Other members of the group then appeared to hand him more ammunition.
As the attack was taking place four members of staff ? two men and two women ? cowered in an upstairs room of the pub.
"For all but one of these defendants the position is aggravated by the fact that they were party to arson at the Bartons Arms in circumstances which put the lives of those within the public house at risk," said Davis.
"The defendants were completely indifferent to the welfare of those upstairs. All they were interested in was luring the police to the area. The fact that members of staff looking on helplessly upstairs were put in real fear and no little danger meant nothing to them."
At the end of the trial Assistant Chief Constable Gareth Cann said the incident had a deep effect on his officers.
"This could easily have been a murder inquiry. Officers came close to being shot and, in a worse case scenario, the helicopter could have been brought down. Thankfully officers were not injured but we can't underestimate the impact it's had on those involved."
Neil Fielding, from the West Midlands Crown Prosecution Service (CPS), said the prosecution had been "enormously challenging".
"The CPS and the police have worked tirelessly together to bring the offenders to justice within a very tight timescale, both to protect the community from the threat these people posed and to ensure continuing public confidence in the criminal justice system following the events of lawlessness last August."
However, Davis admitted that many of those responsible may never be brought to justice.
"They may never be identified because of the poor quality of the available CCTV footage and because those involved had their faces covered."
Autopsy results show that former Glasgow Rangers footballer Arnold Peralta suffered 18 gunshot wounds in what prosecutors described as a ¡°vicious attack¡±.
The 26-year-old midfielder was killed on Thursday when two men on a motorcycle opened fire at a shopping mall in Honduras in his hometown of La Ceiba, on the Caribbean coast.
Investigators in Honduras are analysing security camera footage from Uniplaza shopping mall, where Peralta was ambushed as he parked his car. Another footballer who was with him at the time was unharmed.
An autopsy on Friday showed that he died of ¡°multiple gunshot wounds to the skull, face and chest¡±. Investigators have so far recovered 11 9mm bullet casings from the scene.
Three murder investigation teams have been dispatched from the Honduran capital to assist the investigation, which has shocked a country all too accustomed to random acts of extreme violence.
No suspects have so far been detained, though police arrested a private security guard at the mall after he reportedly refused to hand over the security footage which may have captured the attack.The motive for the attack is yet unknown, but police have ruled out robbery after confirming that the player¡¯s belongings ? and his Porsche SUV ? were left at the scene.
Warring street gangs, organised crime groups and drug traffickers have made Honduras one of the most dangerous countries in the world, with 58 murders per 100,000 habitants this year. Around 80% of drugs from South America pass through Honduras on the way to the US, according to the DEA.
Peralta is at least the 15th person linked to sports who has been murdered in Honduras since 2000, according to the newspaper Mas. In 2003, Milton Flores ? the beloved goalkeeper of Real Espana and the national team ? was riddled with bullets from an AK-47 as he drove home from a match against Real Espana¡¯s rivals Vida.
Earlier this year, the president of Real Espana, Mario Verdial, was killed while traveling with security guards in a suspected extortion-linked assault.
Peralta spent 18 months at Ibrox and helped Rangers win the 2013-14 Scottish League One title, before leaving the club halfway through last season to join Olympia ? one of Honduras¡¯s biggest clubs.
Peralta was in La Ceiba to visit family and friends following the conclusion of his club¡¯s season. The player had recently celebrated the birth of a daughter with his partner.
In an interview with local media, his father said that he¡¯d warned his son not to drive such an expensive car in the city where robberies and common crime are rampant.
¡°This is a very hard blow for me, he was my youngest child,¡± said Carlos Perlata.
¡°He¡¯d never mentioned any problems to me ... I told him that his car was too extravagant for this city.¡±
Rangers will hold a minute¡¯s silence before Saturday¡¯s match against Greenock Morton, and the players will wear black armbands as a mark of respect for the former Blues defender.
Police in Birmingham believe an 18-year-old murder victim was shot while sitting in a car and managed to stagger almost 100 metres before collapsing.
A man was arrested on Friday on suspicion of the murder of Kenichi Phillips in in the Ladywood area of the city. The teenager was the fourth person to be shot dead in Birmingham since the autumn.
Police were called to St Mark¡¯s Crescent at about 6.45pm on Thursday. They found the Phillips with a gunshot wound and he was pronounced dead at the scene. He is understood to have previously lived in Birmingham, but then have moved away.
Birmingham has been trying to shake off the unwanted label of being the gun capital of Britain, which it has held for the last two years. Official figures show it had 562 gun-related offences in the year to April 2015, up from 540 in 2014.
It had a rate of 20 gun offences per 100,000 inhabitants, a higher rate than that in London, which had 19 per 100,000 people, and higher than any other urban area. The average in England and Wales is nine per 100,000 people, according to figures from the Office for National Statistics.
As Phillips¡¯s family mourned, his murder left residents in shock.
Paying tribute, his great uncle, Cee Stylee, said: ¡°Still coming to terms that his beautiful smile will only be a memory (and a happy one) from this day forth, but tears keep falling.¡±
Posting on Facebook, Stylee added: ¡°My heart cries and bleeds for my niece who has lost her baby boy, my sister and the rest of our family.¡±
Det Supt Mark Payne, who heads West Midland police¡¯s CID murder unit, said the victim had been in a black Seat Leon when he was shot.
He said a group of people had been in the street at the time, and it appeared the young man had managed to stagger a short distance around the corner before succumbing to his injuries.
Payne added: ¡°He¡¯s in the car when he was shot. We¡¯ve got the car there [under the forensics tent] and then a sequence of bloody steps and blood trail that leads around the corner.¡±
Adam Tyrell, 52, who was staying with his mother on the street, said his brother had heard a loud bang and shortly afterwards police arrived.
He said: ¡°We were having some food and my brother said he thought he heard something like a gunshot. My mother¡¯s carers came in last night at around 6.50pm and they said there was a police incident and it looked like something serious.
¡°When I walked my dog last night I saw police and they said there had been an incident. There was a dark-coloured car ? I think it was a BMW ? down the road and forensics officers were all around it. This morning they have put a forensics tent around the car.¡±
There were six shootings in 31 days in Birmingham between October and November, which claimed two lives ? Connor Smith, 19, and Derek Junior Myers, 25. In February, Akhtar Javeed was shot and killed at his business premises.
There has been a rise in guns circulating in Britain. Birmingham has the highest rate of gun discharges in Britain per head of population.
In a Guardian interview last month, Ch Const Dave Thompson of the West Midlands force and the national lead for countering firearms, said police were trying to stop guns falling into the hands of criminals.
He said firearms were being reactivated overseas and then ordered for delivery into the UK, camouflaged by the rise in parcels being sent to Britain because of online shopping.
¡°Maybe six or seven years ago we would be stopping people at Dover with 10 Baikals [a make of firearm] concealed in compartments in the car. That has become less of a feature. What has become more of a feature is weapons through the fast parcel system, individual items coming through.¡±
A number of shootings in Birmingham have been linked to long-running gang wars. This week David Jamieson, the police and crime commissioner for the West Midlands, set up a special commission into gangs and gun crime.
He said work by police and others had driven down the spike in gun violence, adding: ¡°This commission will review that work and make recommendations on what needs to be done in future to ensure that this spike in gun crime does not become a trend again.¡±
The road where Phillips was fatally shot was cordoned off and forensics teams were searching the area for evidence, with a large crime-scene tent covering much of the road.
His family is being supported by specially trained officers, police said.
A Texas law enforcement officer testifying on Thursday at the murder trial of a former US marine charged with killing famed navy Seal Chris Kyle and his friend said the two victims were armed when they were shot multiple times.
Texas ranger Michael Adcock said it didn¡¯t appear the weapons carried by Kyle and Chad Littlefield were ever removed from their holsters. Their wounds included multiple gunshots to the back.
The case has drawn intense interest, largely because of Kyle¡¯s memoir about being a sniper who served four tours in Iraq. The Oscar-nominated film based on the book has grossed nearly $300m.
Defense attorneys for Eddie Ray Routh, 27, have said he was insane when Kyle and Littlefield took him to a shooting range in February 2013 to provide support and camaraderie. Routh faces life in prison without parole if convicted of capital murder.
Routh¡¯s mother had asked Kyle, whose wartime exploits were depicted in his memoir, to help her son overcome personal troubles.
Kyle¡¯s widow, Taya Kyle, had testified a day earlier, clutching military dog tags as she told jurors about her final moments with her husband, just hours before he and Littlefield were slain at the range.
Erath County district attorney Alan Nash described Routh as ¡°a troubled young man¡± who on the morning of the killings numbed himself with marijuana and whiskey. He said a history of mental illness should not absolve Routh of the deaths.
During opening statements, a defense attorney had revealed a text message exchange between Chris Kyle and Littlefield as they drove to the lodge with Routh, whom Kyle had picked up at his house.
¡°He¡¯s [sitting] right behind me, watch my six,¡± Littlefield texted back, using a military term for watching one¡¯s back.
Tim Moore, an attorney for Routh, said Kyle and Littlefield¡¯s text exchange shows how Routh was spiraling out of control. He told jurors that Routh was suffering from severe mental strain that day and thought he needed to kill the two or they would turn on him.
Routh was a small arms technician who served in Iraq and was deployed to earthquake-ravaged Haiti before leaving the marines in 2010. Authorities say that after the shootings, Routh drove to his sister¡¯s house in Kyle¡¯s truck, admitted to the killings and told his sister ¡°people were sucking his soul¡±.
Parasitic worms have been found in a North Korean soldier critically injured while defecting to South Korea, highlighting nutrition and hygiene problems that observers believe have plagued the isolated country for decades.
Dozens of flesh-coloured parasites, one of which was 27cm (11 inches) long, were found in the man¡¯s digestive tract during life-saving operations, according to the lead surgeon, Lee Cook-jong.
¡°In my over-20-year-long career as a surgeon, I have only seen something like this in a textbook,¡± Lee said.
The parasites, along with kernels of corn in his stomach, appear to confirm what many experts and defectors have said about the food and hygiene situation for many North Koreans.
Prof Choi Min-ho of Seoul National University¡¯s college of medicine said: ¡°Although we do not have solid figures showing health conditions of North Korea, medical experts assume that parasite infection problems and serious health issues have been prevalent in the country.
¡°[The man¡¯s condition is] not surprising at all considering the North¡¯s hygiene and parasite problems.¡±
The soldier was flown to hospital by helicopter on Monday after his escape to South Korea under fire from North Korean soldiers.
He is believed to be an army staff sergeant in his mid-20s who was stationed in the Joint Security Area in the UN truce village of Panmunjom, said Kim Byung-kee from South Korea¡¯s ruling Democratic party. North Korea has not commented on the defection.
While the contents of the defector¡¯s stomach do not necessarily reflect the wider population, his status as a soldier with an elite assignment suggests he would at least be as well nourished as an average North Korean.
The hospital that treated him said he had been shot in his buttocks, armpit, back, shoulder and knee, and sustained other wounds.
Parasitic worms were also common in South Korea between 40 and 50 years ago, Lee said, but disappeared as economic conditions improved.
Their continued prevalence in North Korea could be linked to the use of human excrement as fertiliser, often referred to as night soil.
Lee Min-bok, a North Korean agriculture expert, said: ¡°Chemical fertiliser was supplied by the state until the 1970s, but from the early 1980s, production started to decrease.
¡°By the 1990s, the state could not supply it any more, so farmers started to use a lot of night soil instead.¡±
Doctors said the soldier¡¯s height was 1.7 metres (5ft 7in) and his weight 60kg (9st 6lb). Use of the corn found in his stomach, which is cheaper than rice but less popular, has increased in years when North Koreans are more worried about harvests.
Between January and September, China exported nearly 49,000 tonnes of corn to North Korea, compared with 3,125 tonnes in 2016, according to figures from Beijing.
About one in four North Korean children grow to be shorter than their South Korean counterparts, according to the World Food Programme. A study in 2009 found preschool children in the North were up to 13cm shorter and up to 7kg lighter than those brought up in the South.
One-quarter of North Korean children aged between six months and five years who attend nurseries the WFP supports suffer from chronic malnutrition, it said.
¡°The main issue in DPRK [the Democratic People¡¯s Republic of Korea] is a monotonous diet, mainly rice or maize, kimchi and bean paste, lacking in essential fats and protein,¡± WFP said.
Some statistics you just cannot get out of your head. The fact that eight American kids every day are shot dead is one of them. When I was first told that, back in 2007, I¡¯d lived in the US for four years. I¡¯d just had a kid. I thought I was pretty much across most of the counter-narrative to the country¡¯s official apple-pie story. But this is one of those facts that, once known, can¡¯t be forgotten. It colours everything.
So when I was asked to pick a day and then follow the stories of the children killed in those 24 hours, I pursued it with some zeal. But as I researched the day in question ? 26 November 2006 ? finding families and police records, knocking on neighbours¡¯ doors, excavating the lives of the recently dead, one story remained elusive.
A 16-year-old boy had been shot outside a Wholesale Liquidators on Eight Mile in Detroit. He was not named in the local papers, where the incident got just a paragraph¡¯s attention. I kept digging, and discovered that the boy¡¯s name was Brandon Moore and he¡¯d been shot in the back by an off-duty policeman. I went on to find out that the policeman in question had been sacked from the force before, for being involved in a fatal hit-and-run accident while drunk-driving, but was reinstated a few years later on appeal. The same policeman went on to shoot dead an armed man during a neighbourhood dispute, and later shot and injured his wife in a domestic fracas. After shooting Brandon in the back, he was reassigned to a traffic unit until he was cleared, following an ¡°investigation¡±.
Right then, I decided the project should be a book, not articles; should, because by failing to see the significance of these deaths, journalism clearly wasn¡¯t doing its job properly. On any measure, Brandon¡¯s death was a story for a big-town paper. But it seemed that, if you were poor and black, the death of a child was not worthy of press attention. And so they kept falling.
But I needed time, resources and opportunity, and those three elements didn¡¯t come together for another seven years. By that time, the statistic was down to seven kids a day (that didn¡¯t make it any less horrific). This time I chose a new day ? 23 November 2013 ? and I spent the next two years finding anyone who would talk to me about the kids who had died: parents, preachers, teachers, siblings and carers. I also combed their Facebook pages and Twitter feeds, sometimes gaining a glimpse into their short lives just hours before they died.
Ten children were shot dead on 23 November 2013. They fell across the country, in slums and suburbs, in rural hamlets and huge cities; they were black, Latino and white; shot by accident and on purpose, at a sleepover, after an altercation, by bullets that met their target and others that went astray. The youngest was nine; the oldest was 19.
There is a clear authorial vulnerability in picking a day at random and seeing what tragedy the universe presents. The book could become an unrelenting tale of woe in which all of the stories ended up being the same. There is not necessarily a Brandon Moore story every day. And there was a chance that none of the victims¡¯ families would talk to me. But that didn¡¯t happen: of the 10 who were killed, eight had family who spoke to me. But I didn¡¯t know how it was going to turn out when I started.
Since Another Day in the Death of America came out last October, America has been quite distracted. Trump¡¯s victory has not exactly left people in the kind of mindframe to take on this kind of nonfiction. So while it has been well received ? it won the Anthony J Lukas prize from Columbia University and has been a finalist in two other US awards ? it hasn¡¯t sold well there. In Britain, it has done far better.
But then, nowhere else in the western world would this book be possible. So in Britain, readers of all political hues will ask: ¡°How can this happen?¡±
Some Americans keep looking for explanations beyond the obvious. A significant proportion of the country don¡¯t want to talk about guns and so shift the conversation to the second amendment of the constitution, or focus on parenting. When I did phone-in shows on US radio, conservatives would often jam the switchboard. I had just three questions for them:
¡°Do you think American kids are worse kids than anywhere else in the west?¡±
¡°Do you think American parents are worse parents than parents anywhere else in the west?¡±
And finally: ¡°Do you love your interpretation of the second amendment more than you love your kids?¡±
Then the phone lines really lit up.
Across town, Nicole was told that Jaiden wouldn¡¯t make it. The neurologist told her that Jaiden¡¯s CT scan was one of the worst she¡¯d ever seen. The bullet had taken a path straight to the back of his brain, where it had ricocheted, causing irreparable damage. They put Jaiden on a ventilator while a decision was made about organ donation. ¡°I don¡¯t remember feeling anything,¡± Nicole says. ¡°All I remember is having this image of him in his shoes. He¡¯d just put his shoes on, and his T-shirt was on the floor. And now he¡¯s in a hospital gown with a thing down his throat. All in about an hour or so.¡± Jaiden was pronounced dead at 3.47pm the next day. Until they wheeled him away to the operating room, Nicole kept it together, but witnessing that was too much to bear. ¡°I couldn¡¯t see the doors close,¡± she says. ¡°It was almost like they were taking him to have his tonsils out.¡± She had been up for 45 hours. ¡°I just remember breaking down and crying, and then somebody put me in a wheelchair and took me out. I didn¡¯t go back to the hospital at all.¡±
It¡¯s easy to mourn lives cut down prematurely but what makes this book stand out is the strength of its analysis. Younge counters our understandable reaction to feel more deeply for ¡°innocents¡± or ¡°angels¡± by examining the structural roots of a crisis that has resulted in such everyday killings. He nails a succession of myths (or as he calls it, ¡°frisks the straw men¡±): that, for example, America is a meritocracy, or that the current crisis resides in the failure of African American families (of the 10 deaths, seven were black, two Hispanic and one white) to discipline their children, or that talking about crime (which he forensically examines) is a taboo subject among African Americans. ? Gillian Slovo in the Guardian
Another Day in the Death of America is published by Guardian Faber at ¡Ì8.99 and is available for ¡Ì7.64 from the Guardian bookshop. The book has been shortlisted for the Orwell prize for political writing. The winner will be announced 15 June.
Last Friday, the church was the venue for the funeral of Jamie Gunn, Marvyn's best friend, whose life fell to pieces after he saw his friend killed. Gunn, who had held Marvyn in his arms after he had been hit at point-blank range with a shotgun shell, never recovered from the shock. The 450 mourners heard that he had stopped eating and begun drinking heavily, a regime that weakened his immune system so much that he succumbed to pneumonia.
'They can call it what they like,' said one mourner, 'but we all know Jamie died of a broken heart.'
Last week's murder of Joan and John Stirland in a bungalow in Lincolnshire is believed to have been in revenge for Marvyn's death. Joan was the mother of Michael O'Brien, who was convicted of Marvyn's murder last month, but in Nottingham the case is just the latest in a long line of revenge shootings, which, according to Chief Superintendent Les Kominiak, amount to 'a pernicious form of urban terrorism calculated to deter victims from coming forward to testify in the courts'.
Police have confirmed that Bradshaw had no criminal connections and was simply in the wrong place at the wrong time. His parents, Christine and Lyndon as well as his older brother Curtis have all been devastated by his death. A hard-working shop fitter he had been friends with Jamie Gunn since he was a toddler, having grown up with him on the notorious Bestwood estate. The pair were part of a group of close friends from the area who would meet most weekends at various pubs around the city.
Jamie, the youngest of three brothers, worked as a pub bouncer. Although no one is willing to go into any details, Gunn's family is said to command a great deal of respect in and around the Bestwood estate. 'I did think about calling for there to be no revenge,' says Rev Christopher Gale, who gave Jamie's funeral service, 'but it's a difficult time and you have to be sensitive. You have to remember that people are grieving the loss of their 19-year-old son.'
With years of urban decay and spiralling unemployment having created a generation hooked on heroin and crack cocaine, Nottingham is seen as prime territory for drugs gangs and as a result is the scene of regular turf wars. Jamaican Yardies and drug dealers from Birmingham, London and Liverpool have all clashed in the city. As a result there were more shooting incidents in Nottingham in 2002 than in all the seven previous years combined and the situation rapidly appears to be getting out of hand.
Last month, nine members of a Nottingham drugs gang were jailed for murder after travelling to Sheffield to seek revenge on a gang that had robbed them of their mobile phones and gold chains. Their victim, father-of-seven Gerald Smith, had no connection to the robbery but happened to be in the doorway of the club where it had taken place when the gang fired their weapons.
In June, a 21-year-old mother was shot in her living room three times as she sat holding her 13-month-old son. Police believe she was attacked in revenge after a former boyfriend lost a major drugs haul.
Another revenge attack took place in May when 50-year-old Rastafarian Derek Senior was shot four times in the chest, abdomen and legs outside his Nottingham home by a gunman who escaped with an accomplice on a motorbike. A week earlier he had given evidence against a gang of men accused of viciously attacking him in a pub. The chief suspect, James Brodie, is also wanted for questioning over the murder of Nottingham jeweller Marian Bates, who was shot dead last year.
Quite why Nottinghamshould have produced such a spate of violence remains a mystery.
Sitting in the heart of the lowlands that once produced much of Britain's coal, the centre of the city is now almost entirely ringed by run down, sprawling, low-rise estates which were originally conceived as high-density housing for the local workforce. With little or no recreational facilities and declining employment, many areas of the city are spiralling into decline. Huge numbers of properties, many of them close to the city centre, are boarded up, burned out or simply falling down.
The collapse of the mining industry in the north of the county has forced many workers back into the city and it is their increasingly disaffected children who are being drawn into Nottingham's drugs and guns culture. Many leave school convinced a career in crime is their only option for getting out of the ghetto and are all too eager to start as young as possible. In recent months children as young as 13 have been caught with guns.
Turf wars have become increasingly common as loyalty to particular estates and areas of the city has grown. Many of the most serious clashes have grown from nothing more than one gang feeling they have lost 'face' because another has passed through their territory.
THE CHAIN of events that led to the latest killings began in 2001, the year that Gary Salmon, a 32-year-old bodybuilder, was jailed for two years for beating up a man who owed drugs money to his friend O'Brien. Salmon pleaded guilty to causing actual bodily harm and the judge ordered that charges of kidnap and robbery remain on file
Salmon and O'Brien shared a close bond and had previously been jailed for committing a robbery together. Both had a number of enemies, but it was Salmon who seemed destined for an early grave, having fallen out with members of a local drugs gang. On 1 August, four weeks before the killing of Bradshaw, Salmon was standing at the door of his house in Brooklyn Road when a van approached. An unknown gunman got out and fired at least three shots towards him.
A FEW WEEKS later, O'Brien and Salmon were trying and failing to get into a number of after-hours clubs in the Nottingham area. At Obsessions nightclub O'Brien was turned away because he was wearing trainers and a tracksuit top. Forming his fingers into the shape of a gun he pointed at bouncer Lee English and told him that he could come back and sort him out.
'He said he would do it his way,' English said later. 'He said he would use a gun and shoot to kill and that I would get it in the head or the chest.'
The pair returned to O'Brien's rented home in Bulwell where they met O'Brien's 16-year-old girl friend and her 14-year-old friend. It was there, while drinking champagne and smoking cannabis, that Salmon heard that there was a lock-in in progress at the nearby Sporting Chance club.
O'Brien tried to get inside, but a fight broke out with Jamie Gunn - said to be connected to the local underworld - and some of the club's bouncers. In the fracas that followed, O'Brien was hit in the head with an ashtray, leaving a deep facial cut. He and Salmon returned home, where it is alleged they changed into dark clothing, gloves and balaclavas and Salmon produced the gun, wrapped in a coat, and handed it to O'Brien.
According to O'Brien's girlfriend, who knows him as JJ: 'He [O'Brien] pointed the gun at me. I said "Don't do that" and he said "I'm not going to shoot ya". He said, "That's what I am going to do to him".'
The pair left the house and headed towards the car park of the Sporting Chance, where Jamie and two friends were being driven by Marvyn. He had just pulled out when Jamie, sitting in the back seat, saw two men in balaclavas approaching and ducked. A shot rang out and when he looked up Marvyn had been hit in the back of his head. He remained conscious until the police and paramedics arrived, but nothing could be done for him. Spattered with his friend's blood, Jamie held onto Marvyn until help arrived, watch ing him slip in and out of consciousness.
According to O'Brien's girlfriend, the two men then returned home. 'They were out for about 15 minutes. When they came back they were panicking. JJ said, "I shot him. He was a bad man. Watch this being in a newspaper tomorrow."'
Salmon immediately went on the run and a week later O'Brien was arrested. Convinced that her son was innocent Joan Stirland, a children's cancer nurse, made no secret of her disgust for those who had 'set him up' as she toured the pubs and bingo halls of Nottingham. She ignored the threats and warnings that followed, but five days later two men on a motorbike were seen outside her house. Minutes later a volley of shots were fired through the front window. John was lying on the settee and Joan was standing when the first bullets hit. He dived over and dragged her to the ground.
TERRIFIED, the Stirlands fled Nottingham next day, leaving all their belongings behind and moving into a police safe house. Just after Christmas, they settled in a rented holiday bungalow in Trusthorpe on the Lincolnshire coast, where they lived until they were murdered.
Salmon was also being sought for revenge. The same day the Stirlands' home was attacked, an imitation grenade was thrown through the window of Salmon's house and his girlfriend's property was firebombed. The following day Kevin White, a close associate of Salmon and O'Brien, was shot and wounded by a pillion passenger on a passing motorcycle.
In court, O'Brien's defence was that Salmon alone had been responsible for the killing. His defence team pointed out that O'Brien had never been convicted of an offence involving a firearm while Salmon had stashed a shotgun in his cupboard because of an ongoing dispute with members of the local underworld. Salmon had also drawn further suspicion by going on the run immediately after the shooting, whereas O'Brien had stayed in Notting ham.
Found guilty of murder, O'Brien threw a cup of water at Bradshaw's relatives and screamed: 'I'm not bothered, I'm a bad boy. Your son looked like a doughnut with a big hole in his head. I don't care.' Judge Richard Pollard responded with the life sentence, adding the stipulation that O'Brien must serve a minimum of 24 years before parole could be considered. O'Brien turned his fury to the judge and barked back: 'I'll do that standing on my head.'
Meanwhile, Salmon has remained at large despite the offer of a ¡Ì10,000 reward, an appeal on BBC1's Crimewatch and a major advertising campaign which saw his picture plastered on buses and trams throughout Nottingham. 'We don't need any more evidence on him,' says Detective Chief Inspector Phil Walker, the man in charge of the hunt, 'we just need to find him.'
In Trusthorpe, the Stirlands tried to blend in as best they could. Joan, known for her sharp temper, soon became known at the local bingo club. A few days before she died, she was thrown out for using abusive language. To most of their neighbours, however, they were seen as a lovely couple who kept themselves to themselves.
IF THE Stirlands hoped that the move to Trusthorpe would make them safe, they were very much mistaken. On 13 July, a few days after her son was convicted, Joan contacted Nottinghamshire police to say she had heard threats had been made against her and her family. Next day Nottinghamshire police told their colleagues in Lincolnshire. That was the last contact the couple had with Nottinghamshire police until their deaths on 8 August
That day Joan called police officers in Nottinghamshire just before 2pm to say her neighbour had reported seeing a man hanging around the house the previous evening. She explained that this had not been reported to Lincolnshire police and emphasised she did not want the backgrounds of her and her husband revealed. 'She asked for a normal response to a prowler,' said a Lincolnshire police spokesman. But within half an hour of the call the couple had been shot dead.
Detectives now believe the murder had been planned for some time. The getaway car used had been stolen as part of a burglary more than two weeks earlier. It was found burned out several miles from the murder scene.
At least one of O'Brien's sisters and several members of the Stirland family are now under police guard.
Four years ago, Nottinghamshire became the first UK police force to arm officers on routine patrol. The initially temporary measure, which has been reimposed in the city and introduced elsewhere in Britain, focused on the notorious St Ann's and Meadows areas of the city and followed 14 drug-related shootings in the space of a few months. Despite such radical innovations, the gang culture shows no sign of abating.
Technically, Brighton-born Londoner John Gosling, although Mekon/Gosling is so fond of collaborators that he probably gathers up a posse for trips to the supermarket.
Previous studio partners in crime (we use the term advisedly) have included gangland veteran Mad Frankie Fraser. Currently, Gosling is joined by Leslie Winer, former model whose colourful past includes "looking after" William Burroughs, dating Basquiat and being deported from Japan for fighting with sailors.
Didn't the Mekon used to be some sort of cartoon character? Yes, and you may remember the Mekons, an equally cartoonish country punk band from Leeds. However, neither of those are a musician-turned-DJ-turned-DJ/musician.
Come again? Oh, do keep up. Once upon a time, Gosling was a member of the infamous Psychic TV, who helped pioneer electronic loops (samplers, before samplers), until they were eventually dogged by tabloid allegations involving the Devil.
Crikey! Don't fret - by this point Gosling was long gone, having discovered house music and a more spiritual calling as a DJ. Scoring a hit as Bassomatic (with William Orbit) was not good enough for the chameleonic John.
In the 90s he was a musician again (in dance-rock outfit Agent Provocateur), an in-demand DJ (remixing Madonna) and, latterly, Mekon. Mekon's fearsome, leftfield dance/rock/hip-hop identity somehow brings his entire history together, and has already spawned one seminal single, 1998's Skool's Out, with Schooly D, as well as Revenge of the Mekon with Mad Frank.
Hardly a new act, then? No, but one on the verge of a breakthrough. The pulverisingly infectious Calm Gunshot (those Nico-like smouldering vocals are Leslie Winer's) is followed by a possibly even more chart-threatening collaboration with Roxanne Shante.
Surely Winer will do it. She's already had hits with Sleeper. That's Louise Wener, you clot.
Buy if: You enjoy fierce breakbeats, mashed up electronics and gangland fantasises from the safety of your front room.
Don't buy if: You are Mad Frankie Fraser and will blag one, thank you.
So where can I hear this stuff? Calm Gunshot is out now on Wall of Sound.
The Tower of Babel, iconically painted by Pieter Brueghel the Elder in the 16th century, forgettably re-created by John Huston in his film The Bible, is - as recorded in the first nine verses of Genesis, Chapter XI - one of the founding myths of Judaeo-Christian civilisation. It's a brutal tale of God's anger over the hubris of a united humanity's attempt to build a tower whose top might reach heaven. To punish His own creations, He scattered them to the four corners of the earth and 'confounded their language, that they may not understand each other's speech'. During the first third of the 20th century the silent cinema went some way towards the forging of a universal, unifying art which was destroyed by the coming of sound. So the film Babel, which concerns itself with what divides and unites mankind, unfolds in four languages - English, Spanish, Arabic and Japanese.
The Mexican director Alejandro Gonzalez Inarritu and his scriptwriter Guillermo Arriaga are noted for the multiple overlapping stories of their previous collaborations, Amores perros and 21 Grams (a technique Arriaga was also to employ in The Three Burials of Melquiades Estrada). In Babel they link three continents and four families. Their theme is a variation on the so-called butterfly effect by which everything in the world is mysteriously, or scientifically, linked. Thus an insect fluttering its wings in the Amazon Basin can initiate a chain of events that ends in a hurricane in the Indian Ocean.
Here, a gun fired more or less at random with no purpose other than to test how far a bullet might go has consequences in Morocco, the United States, Mexico and Japan. The weapon is an American .270 Winchester hunting rifle that has gone from the States to Japan then come into the hands of an elderly Arab in a remote corner of southern Morocco. A neighbour buys the gun to kill jackals threatening his goats. While out tending the family herd, his young sons take pot shots, one of them at a distant tourist bus in the valley below them, not expecting to hit anything. But an American woman is seriously wounded and the repercussions are profound.
Last year, Andrew Niccol's film about the arms trade, Lord of War, began with a brilliant opening sequence that follows a bullet from a Russian factory as it passes through various hands until it blows a hole between the eyes of a child in Africa. Babel, however, is not, I think, trying to make yet another assault on gun culture and the armaments industry. The aim is to show what unites people through their natures and aspirations and what divides them through class, culture, politics, the global economy and the terrible gap in communication.
The American victim of the gunshot wound is Susan (Cate Blanchett), travelling in Morocco with her husband Richard (Brad Pitt). They're an affluent, good-looking, middle-class couple who left their two small children in San Diego to make this journey into the Sahara. The desert reflects their spiritual emptiness and they inevitably remind us of Port and Kit Moresby in Paul Bowles's The Sheltering Sky who are similarly exposed to life and death in North Africa. Their children are in the capable hands of a loyal, middle-aged Mexican maid, Amelia (Adriana Barraza), who, unable to find someone else to care for them, takes them with her to a family wedding south of the border. Meanwhile, seemingly unconnected to the two other strands, a widowed Japanese businessman is having trouble with his rebellious daughter Chieko (Rinko Kikuchi), an attractive deaf-mute schoolgirl troubled by her burgeoning womanhood. It turns out that the link resides in a generous (but tainted) gift to a guide at the end of a hunting expedition.
The film unfolds, non-chronologically, in some 24 chapters, and we are left, as with a number of recent movies, to compose the narrative in our heads. For instance, the second chapter has the Hispanic maid receive news on the phone of the events in Morocco, but this is before we have even seen Brad Pitt and Cate Blanchett. It isn't until the penultimate chapter that we're present in Casablanca to see Pitt make the call home.
Taking in this cleverly contrived story, we steadily become aware of the shared neglect, innocence and playfulness of the two Moroccan boys, the girl in Tokyo and the pre-teenagers in San Diego. Moreover, while the movie seems to be sending out an ecumenically bland message about us all being part of mankind, and not sending to ask for whom the bell tolls, it is evident that some men's deaths are more significant than others, and indeed that America is the bell-ringer. The immediate assumption is that the bullet has been fired by a terrorist, and the European tourists panic and flee. A crisis is created, worldwide interest aroused. But whereas, partly by nature, partly by social deference, the authorities are courteous and helpful in their treatment of middle-class citizens, the peasants in Morocco are brutally ill-treated by their own police, and the Mexicans at the US border are viewed with contempt and suspicion.
The global village depicted in Babel is a harsh, unfair place. Tourism and mass media have done little to improve mutual respect and understanding. The film does not state this directly, but it dramatises it in a powerful and moving fashion. The task of re-creating that human unity God destroyed when the Tower of Babel was being built is probably too great, or has been too long neglected. Some will think this film glib and overly schematic. I found it an impressive, beautifully acted work with a tragic sense of life. The formality of its structure controls a seething anger.
There's a memorable scene in the film Black Hawk Down after US Ranger Corporal Jamie Smith is shot in the upper thigh. The wound extends too high for a tourniquet to work; direct pressure is inadequate and his severed femoral artery cannot be clamped. He messily bleeds to death in front of his helpless comrades. It has happened: Black Hawk Down is based on real events in Somalia 13 years ago.
Colonel Tim Hodgetts offers Smith's death as an example of where military first aid failed to stop catastrophic haemorrhage. Hodgetts has served in hotspots around the world including Belfast, Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan. As an adviser for emergency medicine covering all three armed services - and honorary professor of emergency medicine at Birmingham university - Hodgetts knows battlefield injuries at first hand. Smith's death saw the US military turning to researchers and industry for new solutions. "If you look back through history, many advances have been made in medicine through conflict," says Hodgetts.
Although body armour means soldiers are now better protected, it has altered injury patterns. Limbs now bear the brunt and the most common cause of potentially avoidable battlefield death is external haemorrhage. "Catastrophic external haemorrhage from the limbs is a real priority," says Hodgetts.
American figures show that almost 50% of combat fatalities before evacuation in Iraq and Afghanistan are attributed to uncontrolled bleeding; two minutes may be all it takes.
"If you're next to somebody who has had their leg blown off by a landmine, then the first thing we do is rapidly apply a tourniquet - called the combat application tourniquet," says Hodgetts.
The tourniquet - which can be applied with one hand - has been given to soldiers in operational areas since April 2005 along with a new emergency bandage. They also have ready what Corporal Smith's comrades did not.
"The difference today is that we have provided products that are designed particularly to control massive haemorrhage in those areas of the body that are too proximal [close to the torso] for a tourniquet and where pressure through a dressing alone is not adequate. These injuries are in the junctional areas of the groin and axilla [armpit]," says Hodgetts.
Those parts of the body are most at risk because the arteries come closest to the skin. The new products, used in Iraq and Afghanistan, are topical haemostatic (to stop bleeding) agents for application directly to the wound.
The British army has given the HemCon bandage to its team medics, who comprise one in four combat soldiers. It controls bleeding by becoming extremely sticky when in contact with blood and promoting clot formation. HemCon has saved more than 100 lives in the US military.
Another life-saving technology - QuikClot - is also used by British medics further back in the evacuation chain between the point of wounding and hospital. It's an inert, grainy mineral that is poured directly into the wound and acts like a molecular sieve. It sucks up water molecules from the blood, leaving platelets and clotting factors behind to promote rapid natural clotting, and so prevents severe blood loss.
"HemCon and QuikClot have been used, but a lot more extensively by the Americans," says Hodgetts. "The feedback we get from the frontline troops is that they have great faith in the products."
But not everything is so professionally rewarding. Hodgetts takes issue with a front page story in the Guardian (Veterans' groups criticise "guinea pig" decision, September 16) which said the MoD had decided that soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan could be treated with a blood-clotting drug without controlled trials.
That drug is NovoSeven (Recombinant Factor VIIa or rFVIIa), made by Nodo Norvisk, the Danish pharmaceuticals company. It has only been licensed for use with haemophilia patients and it works on the complex process of blood clotting.
Hodgetts says: "The inference was that we use this drug widely, we use it indiscriminately and we are experimenting on soldiers." But, he says, "We are extremely cautious about its use and have rigid guidelines. It is only used by consultants and is only used at hospital level."
NovoSeven has been used twice on UK soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan after consultants had exhausted all other methods of treatment. The two soldiers were bleeding from severe pelvic injuries.
Says Hodgetts: "It was used when everything else was failing and the clinician thought that the patients were going to die. Both of the patients survived."
Tim Coats understands serious injuries in the civilian world. As professor of emergency medicine at Leicester University, he has a research interest in bleeding. Half his time is spent at Leicester Royal Infirmary where he treats badly injured patients.
While gunshot wounds are rare in NHS hospitals, road traffic accidents resulting in blunt trauma are not. Coats says blood may leak internally from many small vessels or ooze from damaged organ surfaces. This calls for a different approach.
"That's where the haemostatic agents come in," says Coats. Although he has not used it, he knows about NovoSeven which strengthens and accelerates this process. There is some feeling, he says, that the military is a little more enthusiastic about the drug than the current medical evidence supports.
It is not licensed for use in trauma cases - but that's not a prohibition. "NovoSeven is occasionally used as a drug of last resort in the NHS. Most of the largest UK hospitals might have used it for trauma once or twice. It is certainly not in common use," says Coats. Another much cheaper drug, tranexamic acid, is undergoing a large international clinical trial in trauma patients. Routinely used in heart surgery, it's believed that tranexamic acid may be of benefit in trauma by stopping the body breaking down a new clot.
The military remains eager for new medical technology, and Hodgetts says: "We are constantly scanning the horizons. Every year we will re-evaluate what our strategy is for haemorrhage and, if something has changed significantly and there is good evidence, then we will change our strategy," he says.
Nanotechnology may be one possibility for the future. In experiments with animals, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Hong Kong University researchers have shown that bleeding can be stopped in seconds - far faster than present methods. A liquid made from peptides (protein fragments) is applied to open wounds. The peptides self-assemble into a nanoscale protective barrier gel. This seals the wound, stops the bleeding in less than 15 seconds and eventually breaks down into molecules that cells can use for tissue repair.
Haemorrhage is still a battlefield reality. But technology is making it less lethal.
¡¤ If you'd like to comment on any aspect of Technology Guardian, send your emails to tech@theguardian.com
Gold Coast man Johann Ofner was fatally wounded when a prop gun ¡°loaded with blanks¡± was fired during the final scene of a Bliss N Eso video involving only professional stunt actors, the hip-hop group¡¯s management has said.
Ofner, who died from chest wounds on the Brisbane set of the video clip on Monday, had been hired by an accredited stunt company, the band¡¯s management said. The company had engaged a licensed armourer who was on location to monitor the prop weapon, it said.
In a further statement on the tragedy, which is the subject of parallel investigations by police and workplace health and safety, Bliss N Eso¡¯s management said ¡°all of the appropriate permits were in place for the filming¡±.
Acting superintendent Mick Dowie said police had interviewed the person who fired the prop gun, which he understood had been discharged in close proximity to Ofner.
Dowie said the sudden death investigation would mirror the steps taken in a homicide inquiry, with ballistics analysis, further interviews and details on cause of death likely to take more than month before a police report went to the coroner.
Dowie said he had ¡°no expertise¡± to comment on industry claims about the risks of firing weapons loaded with blanks at close range.
Ofner was survived by a young daughter and his partner, Kati Garnett, who posted on her public Instagram account on Monday: ¡°Today the love of my life was taken from me and I still can¡¯t believe it.
¡°I don¡¯t know what I¡¯m going to do without you. The best people are always taken from us, you were a true Angel. I love you so so much forever and ever.¡±
Dowie would not comment on whether charges could be laid, saying the ¡°unusual circumstances¡± would take time to work through and a coronial inquest was possible.
¡°From my perspective I¡¯ve never attended a job where someone¡¯s passed away as a result of something that happened on a stage or set, which is unusual,¡± he said.
Dowie confirmed a licensed armourer was on set. Asked who was responsible for safety on set, Dowie said, ¡°There would be a number of people that would be required to manage health and safety on those movie sites, I presume.¡±
Bliss N Eso, whose management said ¡°anti-violence messaging has been a continued theme in the band¡¯s music since forming in the late ¡¯90s¡±, said they were ¡°devastated about the tragic passing of Johann Ofner¡±.
¡°We continue to express our support and condolences to the family and friends of those so deeply affected by this sad event and appreciate your ongoing understanding in this incredibly difficult time,¡± the trio said.
Their management said the group engaged an ¡°award-winning production company¡± to film the clip for their upcoming single, Friends Like You.
The production company engaged an accredited stunt company, which in turn engaged the armourer to provide theatrical and weapon supplies, the management said.
Ofner had been hired for the video as a ¡°professional stunt person¡±, not as an actor via a separate social media call out, they said.
¡°Johann was tragically fatally injured when a prop gun was discharged as part of filming a scene in Bliss n Eso¡¯s video clip,¡± the statement said. ¡°The gun was loaded with blanks, not live ammunition.
¡°The exact cause of Johann¡¯s fatal injury is still to be confirmed but, as the gun was loaded with blanks, not live ammunition, the cause was not a bullet or live round.¡±
The group¡¯s management said: ¡°Only professional stunt people were used in the scene that involved prop guns.¡±
Actors engaged via the social media casting call were ¡°not at any point involved in any scenes that used the prop guns¡±, they said.
Zoe Angus, the national director of equity with the Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance (MEAA), told the ABC she would closely watch the findings of Queensland police¡¯s criminal investigation into the death.
Angus said there had been ¡°no instances of fatalities to our knowledge in the recent past, and that is because we have very rigorous standards in relation to safety¡±.
She said the use of guns on Australian film sets required permits, a licensed and qualified armourer to supply the weapons, and advance notice to police if weapons were to be fired. It also required a ¡°safety officer on set who will do a safety breakdown¡± and a stunt coordinator for any live action involving the weapons, she said.
Bliss N Eso¡¯s management said the clip was ¡°a ¡®sliding doors¡¯ fictional story that contained a secondary scene depicting the robbery of a poker game¡±.
¡°The poker segment was the final scene to be filmed after a week of filming and was the only scene to feature weapons and was a minor part of the overall story line,¡± it said. ¡°The song and the video is about having a positive friend or influence in your life that helps you to overcome personal hardships and adversity.
¡°The music video was written as a short film where multiple story lines based around the theme of the song intersect at the end to ultimately depict a positive outcome against all odds.¡±
San Francisco police and the FBI raided the home of Stanislav Petrov, the man whose beating by sheriff¡¯s deputies was caught on surveillance video last fall, and arrested him and three others and left one other with multiple gunshot injuries.
The raid, which began late on Friday afternoon and involved search and arrest warrants for multiple parties, male and female, was conducted by dozens of law enforcement officers.
Later on Friday, the FBI confirmed that Petrov, who is suing over the beating incident, was one of the arrested parties. Prosecutors declined to say what charges he will face when arraigned in court on Monday.
In November, Petrov was a suspect in an auto theft case and beaten by two Alameda County sheriff¡¯s deputies after he led them on a high-speed chase across the Bay Bridge, from Oakland to San Francisco. After surveillance footage of the beating was released, a homeless couple alleged they had been bribed with goods stolen from Petrov, and the public defender¡¯s office called for the deputies to face charges.
The raid was not the first to target the Mission District house: in mid-March, Petrov was arrested by the FBI because he had a gun, though San Francisco district attorney George Gascon declined to press charges. On Friday, FBI sources told local ABC7 News Petrov was not wanted by them at that time.
Days before the most recent raid, Petrov filed a claim seeking damages from Alameida County for what his lawyers described as ¡°the worst law enforcement beating we¡¯ve seen on video since Rodney King¡±.
Two officers were placed on paid administrative leave pending the outcome of criminal and internal affairs investigations. A third deputy was suspended for allegedly stealing a gold chain from Petrov. The officer allegedly gave the chain, as well as cigarettes, money and crystal meth to two homeless people who had witnessed the incident. Sheriff¡¯s deputies have since been ordered to wear body-cameras.
The latest incident comes against a backdrop of a rising number of complaints against the SFPD. Allegations of bias and misconduct resurfaced this week, after the district attorney¡¯s office revealed that a group of officers are under investigation for exchanging racist and homophobic text messages.
Last year, officials revealed that a first group of officers fell under investigation for similar text messages. Attorneys have expressed concern that police officers¡¯ testimony may now be tainted, and thousands of cases could be reviewed.
Court filings in a federal corruption case show that the text messages include repeated use of anti-black and anti-gay slurs. The first case involved 14 officers, and this week prosecutors found at least four more involved. They came to light as part of an investigation into claims lodged last year, by an unidentified woman, who alleged that Taraval station officer Jason Lai sexually assaulted her.
Investigators say that in addition to Lai, officers Keith Ybarreta and Lt Curtis Liu, who retired after being accused of obstructing the rape inquiry, were involved. Gascon said his office only learned of the text messages last week while preparing to charge Lai with misusing police databases. All four officers have been suspended.
¡°Such misconduct does an extraordinary amount of damage to the public trust and the already strained relations between police and the communities they are sworn to protect,¡± Gascon wrote in a public statement.
¡°Delaying disclosure of such misconduct only adds to the current climate of distrust.¡±
The earlier batch of texts became public in a federal corruption case last year. In December, a superior court ruled in favor of 13 of the officers, who were allowed to keep their jobs and avoid disciplinary action. The judge in the case found that the police department had waited too long to investigate and take action.
The city¡¯s public prosecutor said his office was looking into arrests made over the past decades involving the accused officers.
The chairman of a football club caught up in the Pakistan spot-fixing scandal has died in a suspected suicide.
David Le Cluse, 44, was found dead from a gunshot wound on Saturday in a garage near his home in Surrey.
He was chairman of Croydon Athletic, whose owner Mazhar Majeed was arrested in August following allegations that members of the Pakistan cricket team were involved in spot fixing during their recent tour of England.
Le Cluse, who was married with two children, was reportedly devastated when the Ryman League club became embroiled in the scandal.
A statement posted on the club's website said: "Croydon Athletic are deeply shocked and saddened by the sudden tragic death of their chairman, David Le Cluse, on Saturday 2 October.
"Our thoughts and prayers are with David's wife and children, and we would ask everyone to respect their privacy at this devastating time for them."
Croydon Athletic's former manager Tim O'Shea told The Times: "He was very upset at the allegations and the club getting involved.
"It probably hit him harder than most because of his personal friendship with Majeed.
"He wanted nothing more than for the club to succeed and he was probably upset and affected by it more than anybody else."
Majeed was arrested on suspicion of conspiracy to defraud bookmakers and released on bail.
The spot-fixing allegations centred on the timing of no-balls delivered during the Test match.
Undercover reporters from the News of the World allegedly paid a middleman ¡Ì150,000 and in return were told exact details relating to play during the following day.
In video footage released by the paper, Majeed was apparently seen with a pile of money in front of him.
Le Cluse's body was found at 10.40am on Saturday in a garage in Park Gate Road, Sutton, following reports of a man with a gunshot wound.
The Metropolitan police said: "A 44-year-old man suffered what is believed to have been a gunshot wound to the head. He was pronounced dead at the scene.
"The circumstances of his death are being treated as unexplained. Inquiries are ongoing."
Troops briefly clashed with a small group of protesters who attempted to block a highway in an upscale neighborhood of Caracas after thousands of opposition supporters marched to demand the release of students imprisoned during the unrest.
Demonstrators complaining of soaring prices and product shortages have vowed to remain in the streets until Maduro resigns, although there are few signs that the country's worst turmoil in a decade will force him from office.Argenis Hernandez, 26, was shot in the abdomen as he was demonstrating near a barricade in the central city of Valencia and died early on Saturday in a nearby hospital, according to local media reports.A motorcyclist attempted to cross the barricade and opened fire on demonstrators when they would not let him through, wounding Hernandez.Bus driver Wilfredo Rey, 31, died on Friday night after being shot in the head during a confrontation between demonstrators and hooded gunmen in the western city of San Cristobal, according to local residents. Rey had not been involved in the protests, they said.Forty-year-old Jesus Labrador was hit by a bullet on Saturday in the Andean city of Merida during a shootout between armed protesters burning tires and hooded gunmen on motorcycles, according to a resident of the area.Labrador died minutes after arriving at the hospital. Four others suffered bullet wounds in the incident.The protests began in February with sporadic demonstrations by university students. They intensified after three people were killed following a 12 February rally in downtown Caracas.The jailed opposition leader Leopoldo Lopez called on Maduro to resign in a letter read by his wife at a rally. "Maduro, if you resign you will open a path toward peace for Venezuelans," wrote Lopez, who was jailed last month on charges including instigating violence after helping turn the protests into a national movement. "The solution is in your hands."A group of demonstrators later gathered near Plaza Altamira, which has been a hot spot of opposition protests, but the National Guard dispersed them with teargas.The opposition has repeatedly declined Maduro's offers for dialogue about the situation, saying they refuse to take part in meetings that will provide little more than photo opportunities for the ruling Socialist party. Maduro says their refusal to engage in dialogue is evidence they are determined to snatch power rather than negotiate.Maduro says adversaries are seeking to destabilise the government as part of a Washington-backed coup similar to the one that briefly ousted socialist leader Hugo Chvaez in 2002.Prosecutors in recent days ordered the arrest of two opposition mayors following accusations they had not done enough to clear barricades in their municipalities.Congress on Tuesday asked prosecutors to open a criminal probe of Maria Corina Machado, an opposition legislator and high-profile protest leader, for crimes including treason and inciting civil war in association with the unrest.
Donald Trump threatened on Tuesday to send ¡°feds¡± to Chicago over a rise in shootings in the city, escalating a feud with the city¡¯s mayor, Rahm Emanuel.
¡°If Chicago doesn¡¯t fix the horrible ¡°carnage¡± going on, 228 shootings in 2017 with 42 killings (up 24% from 2016), I will send in the Feds,¡± Trump tweeted.
Earlier this month, Trump suggested that Chicago would need federal assistance, tweeting: ¡°Chicago murder rate is record setting ? 4,331 shooting victims with 762 murders in 2016. If Mayor can¡¯t do it he must ask for Federal help!¡±
Neither tweet was clear about what the president meant with the abbreviation ¡°feds¡±, which could mean the FBI, national guard or a variety of other federally backed services. The Obama administration had already assigned dozens of federal agents to assist the city, including 52 agents with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, and about 120 FBI agents.
In his earlier tweet, Trump wrongly said the murder rate was ¡°record setting¡±; in the second, he accurately cited the number of shootings in Chicago this year, according to a tally kept by the Chicago Tribune.
On Monday, Emanuel, who served as Barack Obama¡¯s first White House chief of staff before becoming mayor, derided Trump for the new president¡¯s continuing preoccupation with the crowd sizes at his inaugural address last Friday.
¡°You didn¡¯t get elected to debate the crowd size at your inaugural,¡± Emanuel told reporters. ¡°You got elected to make sure that people have a job, that the economy continues to grow, people have security as it relates to their kids¡¯ education. It wasn¡¯t about your crowd size. It was about their lives and their jobs.¡±
Emanuel added that American families did not care about crowd size, saying: ¡°They were talking about jobs, education, healthcare, security.¡±
Earlier this month, a spokesman for Emanuel¡¯s office said that the mayor agreed that ¡°the federal government has a strong role to play in public safety¡±, listing federal funding for summer jobs and at-risk youth, passing gun laws and ¡°holding the criminals who break our gun laws accountable for their crimes¡±.
Trump used the word ¡°carnage¡± to characterize the United States in his inaugural speech, last Friday, although crime rates around the country remain low. The FBI reported a 10.8% single-year increase in homicides in 2015, largely due to violent crime in a handful of cities, including Chicago, Washington DC and Baltimore, while crime remained near historic lows in New York, Los Angeles and other cities.
During his campaign, Trump suggested that Chicago should use stop-and-frisk police tactics, a controversial practice that a federal judge in New York ruled unconstitutional in 2013. Last week the justice department found that Chicago¡¯s police were regularly responsible for using force that was ¡°unjustified, disproportionate and otherwise excessive¡±.
One of my favourite Gary Larson cartoons shows an audience of ketchup bottles sitting in a cinema watching a?film that, naturally, stars bottles of?ketchup. It seems to be a violent kind of film. On screen, one bottle lies smashed and bleeding red pulp all over the street, while another looks on, numb with horror. "Don't worry, Jimmy," a big ketchup bottle in the audience is telling a smaller one, possibly his son, "they're just actors ? and that's not real ketchup."
The original version of this advice is worth heeding if, as a human being, you are watching other human beings in a film directed by Quentin Tarantino. Bullets rip into flesh, which flies out in messy chunks as blood spatters walls and falls like crimson rain on nicely arranged white flowers ? on and on it goes, bang-bang-bang, spatter-spatter-spatter, mercilessly, while we, a grey-haired audience on a Wednesday afternoon, break open our foil-wrapped carrot cake and drain the dregs of our cappuccinos. From the moment we sat down, we've been softened up for these scenes. First came the Pearl and Dean adverts, and then the trailers, all of them an assault on the senses full of dizzying cuts and deafening noises, as if?their makers wanted to pull you from your seat, slap you around the head and make you surrender to their juvenile interpretation of the world. (Which among us has ever seen a film because of its trailer? And how many films, probably some quite decent ones, have trailers put us off?)
And now comes Django Unchained, with its certificated warning to the unaware, or perhaps welcoming words to the aware, that it contains scenes of "strong bloody violence". It begins intriguingly (spoilers follow). In the antebellum American South, an itinerant German dentist (Christoph Waltz) frees the slave Django (Jamie Foxx) and together they form a bounty-hunting team that brings in wanted men dead or alive, which as Waltz explains is a "flesh for cash business", just like slavery. Naturally, there is a good deal of murder and unfeasibly accurate shooting, but it soon becomes clear that Tarantino's interest in historical verisimilitude doesn't stretch much beyond the word "nigger". "I kill white folks and get paid for it," says Django at one point. "What's not to like?" The Ku Klux Klan have terrible trouble fixing their hoods, which is a very funny scene, but also, in 1858, ahead of its time. As for the "Mandingo wrestling", one of the setpieces, in which two slaves fight to the death for their owners' amusement, Tarantino seems to have invented the ritual and borrowed its title from a 1970s novel and movie.
To chastise the director for fictions and anachronisms may be to miss the point. We know Tarantino's interest doesn't so much lie in history as in the history of films; not so much in the time depicted as in previous depictions of the time. Spaghetti westerns, blaxploitation movies, John Wayne: all get their salute as the two men change the purpose of their travels from the hunt for profitable criminals to the finding and freeing of Django's wife, who is still enslaved on a?Mississippi plantation owned by the capricious Mr Candie (Leonardo DiCaprio). And yet Tarantino, to judge by his promotional interviews, wants it?both ways: to create a preposterous entertainment and at the same time to have it taken seriously as a rewarding study of American slavery.
The same charge applies to his violence, of which, according to his now celebrated interview with Channel 4's Krishnan Guru-Murthy, there are two types. The first is what the owners and their assistants do to their slaves by way of whipping, manacling and having dogs tear them to pieces. The second is the catharsis unleashed in a series of bloody events, culminating in Django's massacre of the owner's entire household and the kneecapping of a loyal black servant ? an?"Uncle Tom" ? whom we have been invited especially to dislike. That one avenger should kill so many people, themselves armed, in such a short space of time would, of course, have been impossible in the days of six-shooter pistols and awkwardly loaded rifles, but set a boy down in a school with a modern assault gun or two and it becomes much more possible, if a boy's thoughts of catharsis should run in that direction.
The school shootings at Newton, Connecticut, had happened only three weeks before Guru-Murthy began to ask Tarantino about the possible links between cinematic and real violence, which perhaps explained the director's thrilling loss of control: "I refuse your question ¡¦ I'm here to sell my movie ¡¦ I'm shutting your butt down." His view is that no link exists, that movie violence is a fantasy lacking any effect on real-world behaviour ? unlike, say, the banned TV adverts for cigarettes that were also a kind of fantasy on their maker's part, though one the consumer could easily satisfy at any tobacconist's. The question may be complicated, but to deny any link absolutely is surely to protest too much, unless your reputation and the multi-billion-dollar industry you're a part of depend on it.
I suppose I don't "get" Tarantino. I'm?not sure I completely fall for Martin Scorsese either, ever since I saw his original storyboard for Taxi Driver and saw that in his sketches he had coloured the blood red when everything else ? faces, cars, suits ? was grey, as though he?had bitten his lip like a concentrating child and borne down heavily with a different choice of pencil; "more blood" read an instruction under one of the frames. Certain film critics also leave me at a loss. Insightful, sympathetic writers, such as this paper's Peter Bradshaw or the Observer's Philip French, accord Tarantino what, to me, is a mysterious degree of respect. "A powerful film, its?dramatic brush strokes broad and colourful, its psychological points made with considerable subtlety and wit," French wrote of Django Unchained, "?¡¦?it places Tarantino among the most impressive film-makers at work today."
How can that be? In its first two hours there are some good things, not least the script, and Waltz is thoroughly engaging as the film's wittiest and most humane character. But the subjects Tarantino finds consistently exciting are people being murdered, people screaming in pain, people begging for mercy. Boring might be the wrong word for these events, but their profusion takes away meaning. So much cruelty, so much noise, rehearsed and repeated until it satisfies the man-child in the director's chair. The credits carry a statement promising that no horses have been hurt in the film's making, and it comes as a slight surprise that they have been the only living things in real danger, other than our sensibilities and imaginations.
The next day I saw a documentary about the photographer Don McCullin, whose pictures of wars and disasters have informed so much of our understanding of the world over the past half-century. In the film, his pictures from Biafra, Vietnam, the Congo and Beirut are supplemented by some disturbing and rarely seen footage from the same conflicts. Heart-breaking cruelty, no slow-motion blood: the sight of real violence tends not to inspire or seduce.
? This article was amended on 29 January 2013. It originally misspelled Christoph Waltz's name as Christopher Waltz. This has now been corrected.
Pakistani surgeons have removed a bullet from the head of Malala Yousafzai, the 14-year-old schoolgirl and peace activist who was shot by a Taliban gunman on Tuesday.
Relatives of the girl, who rose to fame for her outspoken opposition to Taliban militancy in her home town of Swat, said she appeared to be doing well after a three-hour operation.
Her father, Ziaudduin Yousafzai, said doctors were encouraged by a CT scan taken after the operation. She was unconscious but had moved her hand slightly after coming out of surgery.
Malala could be moved abroad for further treatment. A plane is on standby in Peshawar and Rehman Malik, the interior minister, has contacted the family to make sure their passports are in order.
Three years ago Malala blogged on the BBC website about the terror of living amid a rising Taliban insurgency. Last year she received the country's first peace prize. She was on a Taliban hitlist for publicly advocating what the movement derides as "secular governance".
On Tuesday morning as she and her classmates sat on a bus to take them home after a midterm exam, three men reportedly approached in search of Malala.
"The man who stopped the vehicle signalled to his other armed accomplices that Yousafzai was inside," the bus driver, Usman Ali, told the Express Tribune newspaper. "Another armed man went to the back of the vehicle and started firing inside."
Malala attempted to deny her own identity, but one of the other girls pointed her out. According to the Express Tribune, a total of four girls, including Malala, were injured.
On Tuesday the Taliban appeared more than happy to take the credit for the attempted murder. "She was pro-west, she was speaking against Taliban and she was calling President Obama her ideal leader," said a spokesman, Ehsanullah Ehsan. "She was young but she was promoting western culture in Pashtun areas."
The attack has horrified many in Pakistan, especially liberals who have long been aghast at what they see as the feeble response by the state and some religious political parties towards the Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), the Pakistani offshoot of the hardline Islamist movement that closed down girl's schools and ran public executions when it was in power in Afghanistan in the 1990s.
On Wednesday, Pakistan's parliament unanimously passed a resolution condemning the attack. Even the head of Pakistan's military, General Ashfaq Kayani, made public his anger during a meeting with Malala's parents at a military hospital in Peshawar.
The attack has alarmed residents of Swat, which was infiltrated by Taliban insurgents who burned schools and executed its enemies. An operation by the Pakistani military eventually forced the Taliban out of the valley in 2009, but the attempt to kill Malala indicates their continued ability to mount attacks in an area still living under a heavy army presence.
"The suicide bombings and blasts may be over in Swat but this attack has rung alarm bells reminding us that militants are still in Swat," said Iqbal Hussain, one of Malala's teachers.
He said the girl's classmates were anxious to return to school despite the attack. "Girls of Swat are courageous and bold and they want to continue their education they cannot be bettered by these tactics of the militants," Hussain said.
An armed intruder who forced his way into the motel room of former CNN anchor Lynne Russell has been shot and killed by her husband.
Lynne Russell told reporters on Wednesday that her husband, Chuck de Caro, decided to stop at a Motel 6 on Albuquerque¡¯s western edge because they were tired after a long day of travelling during a cross-country road trip. When she went out to the car to get something and returned to the room, a man was at the door with a handgun.
¡°He pushed me into the room and that¡¯s when my husband came out of the shower and saw what was happening,¡± Russell told Albuquerque station KOB-TV. ¡°We tried to calm him, confuse him and do everything we could do to just come out of it in one piece.¡±
After grabbing her husband¡¯s briefcase the man started shooting at De Caro. Russell ducked behind the furniture and De Caro fired back, hitting the man.
The robber was killed and De Caro was wounded.
¡°It was a gun battle and Chuck was bleeding heavily, but he didn¡¯t stop firing because the man was firing on him,¡± Russell told the New York Post.
Former CNN colleagues Ted Kavanau and Patrick Clawson told the Associated Press that Russell had described the incident to them.
Albuquerque police did not release names of those involved and a spokesman, Officer Tanner Tixier, said it appeared to be a random robbery attempt.
¡°They weren¡¯t targeted for who they were,¡± Tixier said. ¡°We believe the offender didn¡¯t realize the victim¡¯s husband was in the motel [room]. He believed he had an easy target. That turned out not to be the case obviously.¡±
Russell was a prominent figure when CNN went into around-the-clock news, serving as an anchor from 1983 to 2001. She was one of the first anchors hired at CNN Headline News, then called CNN 2, after it went on the air in 1982.
Kavanau, a manager for CNN at its founding, and founding president of CNN Headline news, said Russell told him the robber staggered out of the room.
Police officers responding to a report of shots fired found the body in a parking lot.
Clawson, a former CNN reporter and a private investigator in Michigan, said Russell¡¯s husband suffered gunshot wounds to the abdomen, groin and arm, and police said he was expected to survive.
A former special forces officer, De Caro said he called upon his training to protect his wife. ¡°I was determined to save my dream girl¡¯s life ? even if it cost my own,¡± he told the Post.
Both De Caro and Russell have concealed carry firearm licences. Russell said the shooting happened four days into the couple¡¯s trip. She called her husband a hero who had saved her life.
The autopsy results released today by the Turkish authorities after the Israeli attack on the Gaza flotilla reveal in chilling detail the intensity of the military force unleashed on the multinational convoy.
Each of the nine victims on the Mavi Marmara in international waters off the coast of Israel in the early hours of Monday morning was shot at least once and some five or six times with 9mm rounds.
The results also reveal how close the fighting was. Dr Haluk Ince, chair of Turkey's council of forensic medicine (ATK), said: "Approximately 20cm away was the closest. In only one case was there only one entrance wound. The other eight have multiple entrance wounds. [The man killed by a single shot] was shot just in the middle of the forehead with a distant shot."
The details emerged as Turkey warned that it may reconsider its diplomatic ties with Israel unless it receives an apology.
The deputy prime minister, Bulent Arinc, warned: "We may plan to reduce our relations with Israel to a minimum."
Namid Tan, the ambassador to Washington, warned that Israel was "about to lose [a] friend". He repeated calls for an independent investigation of the raid and end its blockade against Gaza.
Asked if Turkey might break off relations, he said: "We don't want this to go to that point." But he added: "The government might be forced to take such an action."
Speaking at the funeral of the youngest activist, prime minister Tayyip Erdogan accused Israel of betraying its religion. "You killed 19-year-old Furkan Dogan brutally. Which faith, which holy book can be an excuse for killing him?" he asked.
According to the scientists at the ATK, Dogan, who held US and Turkish citizenship was shot five times ? from close range in the right side of his nose, in the back of the head, in the back and twice in the left leg.
The oldest victim was 60-year-old Ibrahim Bilgen, a Turkish politician, engineer and activist who was married with six children. He had been shot once in the right temple, once in the right side of his chest, once in the back and once in the hip.
Cetin Topcuotlu, a 54-year old former Taekwondo champion who worked as a coach for the Turkish national team, was shot three times ? once in the back of his head, once in his hip and once in his belly. His wife, Cigden, who was with him on the Mavi Marmara said at his funeral on Thursday she would take part in further flotillas to Gaza with her son.
The detail of the wounds came as yet more survivors returned to the UK and gave their account of the attacks.
In a hastily arranged press conference in central Londonshortly after his Turkish airlines plane touched down at Heathrow, Ismail Patel, the 47-year-old chairman of the Friends of al-Aqsa, condemned what he called "the cold-blooded murder and killing of our colleagues". He said: "These deaths were avoidable and I lay the blame squarely with the Israelis."
Israel has previously said its troops had been left with no choice after they came under attack from activists armed with knives and iron bars when they were dropped by helicopter on to the ship.
Patel claimed that as soon as the Israeli Defence Force helicopter appeared above the Mavi Marmara, "it started using immediately live ammunition" without any warning being issued.
After the first victim fell the white flag was raised, he said, but Israeli forces continued firing. "I think the Israeli soldiers were shooting to kill because most of the people who died were shot in the top part of their bodies," he said. He believed that later victims were injured in their legs after a "tactical move" by the commandos to wound rather then kill.
Alex Harrison, a Free Gaza activist who was on the smaller Challenger yacht, which was crewed mainly by women, said the Israelis used rubber bullets, sound bombs and tasers against them.
"Two women were hooded, they had their eyes taped," she said, describing how the yacht was quickly overwhelmed. "We stood and tried to obstruct the armed, masked men and maintained no other defence and still they used violence."
Harrison, 32, from Islington, north London, also witnessed the Mavi Marmara being stormed from above by helicopter and said the Israelis started firing before their troops touched down on the boat.
"I have seen some selective footage that the Israelis have chosen to put out suggesting that we responded with violence," she said. "You must remember that these are unarmed civilians on their own boat in the middle of the Mediterranean. People picked up what they could to defend themselves against armed, masked commandos who were shooting."
The violence was "initiated by the Israelis on a massive scale," she said, adding she was pleased her colleagues on the Rachel Corrie, an Irish vessel, were continuing to Gaza this weekend.
"I am thrilled they are going," she said. "They know exactly what risks they face. They are doing what our government's haven't and I thank them."
Both Harrison and Patel criticised the British authorities for failing to provide sufficient consular assistance while the activists were detained in an Israeli prison in Beersheva.
Patel said he was not visited by anyone from the British mission and Harrison said the consul told her that Israeli officials had prevented him visiting captured Britons.
"I did see the British consul," Harrison said. "He told me that he had sitting outside the prison all day ... asking for access and not been given it. I see that as an insult from Israel to the British, that they were denying the British consul the right that citizens have. I also see it as a sign that the British don't have the strength to stand up to Israel."
Foreign Secretary William Hague confirmed that a total of 34 of the activists on the aid flotilla were British, with all but two of them having been sent to Turkey by the Israeli authorities.
In Gaza City, the de facto Hamas prime minister, Ismail Haniyeh, told crowds of worshippers at Friday prayers that Israel's blockade was in its final stages.
"Now not only Gazans speak of the blockade, but also the [UN] security council and the international community. Everyone is demanding the siege be lifted."
Four gunshot wounds: back of head, right side of face, back, left leg
Four gunshot wounds: right chest, back, right hip, right temple
Four gunshot wounds: left chest, left leg, right leg twice
Six gunshot wounds: left chest, belly, right arm, right leg, left hand twice
Three gunshot wounds: back of head, left side, right belly
¡°Survival of the fit ? only the strong survive,¡± spit Mobb Deep in their apposite first selection tonight from The Infamous, the Queensbridge, New York, rap duo¡¯s iconic 1995 album and the subject of this 20th anniversary tour. It¡¯s not the last number to end in a hail of gunshot samples, with Prodigy and Havoc¡¯s fingers cocked and aimed at the audience.
Like many of their 1990s hardcore hip-hop contemporaries, Mobb Deep prided themselves on playing fast and loose with firearms (Prodigy¡¯s autobiography features a disturbingly blase anecdote from back in the day about Havoc accidentally shooting a Def Jam A&R). Luck as much as strength may explain why they¡¯ve outlived contemporaries (and enemies) such as Tupac Shakur, and survived to reminisce about once standing tall next to Wu Tang Clan and Nas among the hottest properties in east coast rap. But don¡¯t doubt Havoc and Prodigy¡¯s resilience ? they even managed to patch things up after a recent bizarre feud when the former accused the latter via Twitter of engaging in homosexual acts while in prison on, yes, a weapons charge.
Across a tight, raw, and brutally to the point set, the Mobbsters exemplify a gritty, battle-hardened, near telepathically criss-crossing flow that feels like it has long since moved into the realm of pseudo-sibling intuition. As Prodigy notes, Mobb Deep are on a mission to ¡°keep hardcore hip-hop alive¡±, and NSFW themes are routinely visited accordingly over menacingly queasy-heavy beats ? from Temperature¡¯s Rising¡¯s tale of helping a murderer friend evade the law, to the somewhat self-explanatorily Let A Ho Be A Ho.
A venue half the size could have contained the turnout, and there are significant troughs in the energy levels when Havoc and Prodigy break out ¡°new shit¡± from their confusingly titled latest album The Infamous Mobb Deep. But a celebratory bottle of Moet is uncorked and passed around nonetheless towards the end, just in time for cadaverously stone-cold classic Shook Ones, Pt II, and a final defiantly triumphant volley from that gunshot sample.
A Royal Navy serviceman is being held on suspicion of murder after an officer was killed and a second was seriously injured in a shooting incident on board a nuclear-powered submarine.
A group of children had just left HMS Astute, which is docked in Southampton on a goodwill visit, and a party of dignitaries was being shown around when the incident happened.
Among the visitors on board was the leader of Southampton city council, Royston Smith, who last night said he had helped wrestle the person allegedly behind the shooting to the floor.
The Ministry of Defence said reports that the shooting followed a row over use of the submarine's five toilets during the civic visit would be investigated.
A police spokesman said: "Hampshire police were called by their Ministry of Defence colleagues at 12.12pm today and are liaising with them to establish the exact circumstances of the incident." An MoD spokesman said: "Two Royal Navy personnel have been involved in a firearms incident at Southampton docks where HMS Astute is alongside. Sadly, one has now died as a result of his injuries.
"The Royal Navy is now attempting to inform their families as a matter of urgency. A third Royal Navy serviceman has been arrested by Hampshire constabulary and is now in custody."
Last night, there were calls for an inquiry to establish if the public was put in danger, and campaigners said the incident should prompt a rethink about the wisdom of using nuclear submarines.
The police and navy emphasised that submarine security was not breached and were convinced it had not been a terrorist incident. A navy spokesman said: "There is no nuclear incident ."
It is understood that the two victims were male officers and that the weapon used was an SA80 rifle.
Smith, 46, described how the alleged gunman burst into the control room in body armour and camouflage gear brandishing the rifle. He said he had heard six shots. "I heard a hiss which meant one had flown just passed me," he said. "I charged at him, pushed him against the wall and, at the same time got hold of his weapon. We had a tussle and I think I was shouting quite a lot.
"I have no idea why it happened. It is unprecedented for something like this to happen on one of our submarines."
He played down the idea there had been a row over the toilets.
Police said the second man hit by gunfire suffered "significant injuries" but described his condition as stable.
John Denham, the Labour MP for Southampton Itchen, expressed concern about security. He said: "I will be asking ministers to ensure this incident is fully explained."
Di McDonald, chair of the Nuclear Information Service, which promotes awareness of nuclear disarmament, said the incident ought to prompt a rethink on the value of confining men in such an unnatural environment.
Liam Fox, the defence secretary, said: "It is right and proper that a full police investigation is carried out."
Astute, which has a crew of 98, was the first of a new class of submarine. The visit to Southampton was billed as the first chance for members of the public outside Scotland and the north-west of England, where she was built, to see her. She was launched in 2007 and commissioned last year, only to hit the headlines when she grounded off Skye in October.
? This article was amended on 12 April 2011. The original caption referred to HMS Astute, pictured in 2001. This has been removed.
You¡¯ll occasionally hear seagulls on Vince Staples¡¯s records. Raised in Compton and Long Beach, the 23-year-old California rapper includes them, you suspect, to remind listeners where his taut flows come from. The squawks are sometimes followed by gunshots ? more sonic signatures from those LA neighbourhoods.
Juxtaposing Cali sunshine and Cali gang hell is just one thing Staples is good at; playing with time is another. His 2016 EP, Prima Donna, was a self-contained work about fame and death that wound backwards in time.
Before that, his debut album, Summertime ¡¯06 (2015), earned fawning reviews. Bucking convention, it was a double, rife with anger at African American reality. Before making his first marks in the company of Odd Future¡¯s Earl Sweatshirt and Syd tha Kid, Staples was a member of the Crips gang; you assume his uncompromising verses are strongly autobiographical (key track: the devastating Nate, from the EP Shyne Coldchain II). Before that, he was a straight-A student whose dad was a drug dealer ? another good kid in a mad city as per Kendrick Lamar, whose works have inevitably overshadowed Staples¡¯s own rise.
There are no hard feelings. Here on Staples¡¯s second album proper, Lamar appears on a track called Yeah Right, alongside Australian electronic type Flume and experimental pop producer Sophie. They accompany California¡¯s twin talents with an ear-popping barrage of gushes, clanks and distorted bubblegum pop: the flows provide the rhythm.
It¡¯s no exception. Like its predecessors, Big Fish Theory is an album that grabs you by the lapels with its urgency while slapping you round the ears with its sound design. From track one, Crabs in a Bucket, Staples calls out a society that crucifies its black men. ¡°They don¡¯t ever wanna see the black man eat/Nails in a black man hands and feet,¡± he sneers. ¡°Put ¡¯em on a cross or you put ¡¯em on a chain/Lines be the same: ¡®he don¡¯t look like me¡¯.¡± Rolling along underneath is party music, drawn from UK garage and grime. The British undercurrent continues with the sample of Amy Winehouse talking about her art at the start of Alyssa Interlude.
Big Fish Theory grapples once again with injustice ? BagBak yearns for more ¡°Tamikas and Shaniquas in the Oval Office¡± ? but also with the problems of having made it. It¡¯s a furious and sad party record that you can dance to, often.
The poppy Big Fish bounces hard while the club-primed Party People crystallises another Cali cliche ? good vibrations ? and its contradictions: Staples is making thrilling pop music about ugly truths. ¡°Move your body if you came here to party, and if not, pardon me,¡± he says, before knocking everyone¡¯s feet from under them. ¡°How I¡¯m supposed to have a good time when death and destruction is all I see?¡±
And the seagulls? They¡¯re on an interlude called Ramona Park Is Yankee Stadium, accompanied this time by a thunderstorm and New York traffic noises. Naturally, it still ends in a gunshot.
A man is expected to face court in central Queensland next month accused of shooting dead a 5.2-metre saltwater crocodile.
The reptile was found floating in the Fitzroy River near Rockhampton on 21 September.
A 31-year-old Etna Creek man has been issued with a notice to appear in the Rockhampton Magistrates Court on 12 January on one count of unlawfully taking a protected animal.
If convicted, he could face a fine of up to $28,300.
The crocodile was thought to be one of the biggest ever seen in Queensland.
Experts feared the animal¡¯s death could lead to a other crocodiles becoming more aggressive as young males fought for supremacy. Michael Joyce, southern wildlife operations director at Queensland¡¯s Department of Environment and Heritage Protection, said the remaining male crocodiles could act differently and become more hostile as they establish who will rule next.
¡°They don¡¯t necessarily become more aggressive with outsiders,¡± Joyce said on Friday. ¡°But we would expect people to be croc-wise in croc country and be extra vigilant.¡±
Cassius, a male caught in the Northern Territory three decades ago, is recognised as the world¡¯s largest crocodile in captivity. It measures 5.48m and lives at a farm on Green Island in far north Queensland.
A 6.16m Philippine crocodile called Lolong held the record until it died in 2013.
River Valley farm stands at the end of an earth road leading out of Holcomb, a small town on the western edge of Kansas. You can see its pretty white gabled roof floating above a sea of corn stubble. The house is famous for the elm trees which line the drive, giving it the tranquil air of a French country lane. The trees are in poor shape though, and desperately in need of pruning; their branches, leafless now, protrude at wild angles.
There's something else not quite right about the setting. There is a large "stop" sign at the entrance to the road, backed up by a metal barrier and a hand-written poster in red paint proclaiming: "No Trespassing. Private Drive." The warnings seem belligerent for such a peaceful spot.
The explanation for these warnings lies about half a mile away in Holcomb's local park. A memorial plaque was unveiled there two months ago in honour of the former occupants of River Valley farm: the Clutter family, who lived in that house at the end of the elm drive until one tragic night half a century ago. The plaque carries a lengthy eulogy to the family, recording the many accomplishments of the father, Herb Clutter, and telling us that the family's leisure activities included "entertaining friends, enjoying picnics in the summer and participating in school and church events".
Towards the end of the inscription it says that Herb, his wife Bonnie, and two of his four children Nancy and Kenyon, "were killed November 15 1959 by intruders who entered their home with the intent of robbery".
That is a very minimalist way of describing a multiple murder that devastated the town of Holcomb, inspired one of the great books of American 20th-century literature and spawned a stack of Hollywood films on that fateful night exactly 50 years ago this Sunday.
"Four shotgun blasts that, all told, ended six human lives." That was how Truman Capote summed up the murders with somewhat greater drama, referring to the four Clutter victims and their two attackers who died later on the gallows. After reading a short newspaper account of the killings, he decided to make the 1,700km journey from his home in New York to Holcomb to chronicle the impact of terrible violence on a small community. The result, six years later, was In Cold Blood. It propelled him to household fame and fortune, and in the process ensured that Holcomb was put on the map, and changed forever, in ways that many of the townspeople did not ? and still do not ? appreciate.
It is hard to think of any murder case involving six relatively unknown individuals that has captured so many imaginations. In Cold Blood has sold millions of copies and been translated into 30 languages. It was made into a black-and-white film of the same name in 1967 and there was a colour remake in 1996. The story of how it came to be written became the 2005 movie Capote, followed by Infamous the following year.
Kevin Bascue, the sheriff of Garden City, Holcomb's neighbouring town, is well used to the attention. He spreads out on his office table a set of files relating to the Clutter case, one of which records recent visitors who have come on a sort of In Cold Blood pilgrimage from Italy, Japan and all over the US. Next week Bascue will host a producer from Boston who wants to turn the book into a musical.
"The fact that someone from New York like Truman Capote felt compelled to come out all this way to tell the Clutters' story I suppose means it's forever going to be ingrained in people's minds," the sheriff says.
There are many reasons why In Cold Blood has become so ingrained. There is the precision of Capote's writing, which resonates from the first sentence: "The village of Holcomb stands on the high wheat plains of western Kansas, a lonesome area that other Kansans call 'out there'." There is the depth of his research, which he carried on to the end as a witness at the killers' hanging in 1965.
There is also something monumental about the timing of the book. America in 1959 was at a crossroads. It was still bathing in the victory of the second world war and ensuing economic boom. The country was confident and secure, and the body blows of Vietnam still lay ahead.
Nowhere was this sense of purpose more evident than in the US heartlands, with their hundreds of tight-knit communities, like Holcomb, scattered along railway lines across the Great Plains. Capote noted with satisfaction that Holcomb itself lies almost in the exact middle of the continental US.
If Holcomb was representative of that small-town rootedness that defined 1959 America, then the Clutters were representative of Holcomb. "Of all the people in all the world," Capote quotes a local detective, "the Clutters were the least likely to be murdered."
Herb Clutter was an upstanding, dependable character. As the memorial plaque notes, he was involved in the local schools, hospital, church, and was president of the National Association of Wheat Growers ? a title that meant something in those days before the advent of mass-production farming.
"He was a big influence in my life ? when you know somebody like that it tends to kind of inspire you," says Holcomb resident Bob Rupp. "He could see above what most people could see, and visualise how things should be."
It was Rupp's idea to erect a plaque for the Clutters. He knew the family well. So well, in fact, that In Cold Blood's first chapter heading implicitly refers to him: "The Last to see Them Alive."
Rupp was 16 at the time of the killings. His childhood sweetheart of the same age was Nancy Clutter. "She was just a beautiful, outgoing person who had many, many friends. She was just a stand-out individual," he says now.
Rupp was indeed the last person to see the Clutters alive ? other than the killers ? having gone over to River Valley farm on the Saturday night. "Herb was in his study, but Nancy, Kenyon and I sat and watched TV. When the news came on at 10 o'clock it was time for me to leave."
He had planned to go that night with Nancy to a midnight movie but Herb had persuaded them to go the night before. Had they gone after all, things might have been different, at least for Nancy. "You never know . . ." Rupp says, then tails off.
A few hours after he left the farm to walk home, in the early hours of Sunday, tragedy arrived at River Valley farm in the form of Perry Smith and Dick Hickock, recently discharged thieves who had driven 400 miles expressly to rob the Clutter home, expecting to find in it a safe containing $10,000.
In Capote's telling, Smith and Hickock were the other, dark side of Herb Clutter's America. They were everything he was not: impetuous, profane, rootless, lost. All Herb's striking moral strength was just as strikingly absent in them.
Sheriff Bascue's files contain the killers' confessions. Smith's statement, typewritten on faded yellow paper, is particularly chilling. "That's when I cut Mr Clutter's throat," he tells the officer leading the investigation, Alvin Dewey. "I says, 'Should I shoot him?' and Dick looked at me and he says, 'Yeah, go ahead; go ahead.' I raised the shotgun and pulled the trigger."
Hickock's statement, written in the third person, describes the shooting of Nancy. "Before Dick shot her, Nancy said, 'Oh please don't, please don't.'" Another file contains the police forensic photograph of Nancy's body. She is curled up in a foetal position, her hands tied behind her back, blood splattered on her bedroom wall.
When they left the farmhouse, leaving behind the bodies of the Clutter parents and their two younger children, Smith and Hickock took with them all the cash that Herb had on him ? the princely sum of about $40.
Capote doesn't shrink from exploring the brutality of the killers, but he also forces us to consider their wounded humanity. In Perry, in particular, he captured an extraordinarily complex character, one capable of placing a pillow beneath Kenyon's head to make him more comfortable minutes before shooting him dead.
If the moral clash between Herb Clutter and his killers lies at the core of In Cold Blood, a clash of a cultural kind lay behind its writing ? between Capote and the farming folk of Holcomb whom he came to live among. Capote was 5ft 4in, openly gay, with a squeaky voice and flamboyant fashion sense, as portrayed brilliantly by Philip Seymour Hoffman in his Oscar-winning role in Capote, and Toby Jones in Infamous.
Holcomb men, by contrast, dressed then pretty much as they do now. When I meet Rupp he is wearing a baseball cap, blue denim shirt and jeans, and cowboy boots. "The type of person Capote was threw me off right away," Rupp says. "He wasn't the kind of person I wanted to spend time with ? he was very, very strange."
Nelle Harper Lee, Capote's friend and fellow writer who came with him to Holcomb, once said: "Those people had never seen anyone like Truman ? he was like someone coming off the moon."
Capote's first few days in town were difficult. Everyone gave him the brush-off. Harper Lee was crucial in overcoming the initial hostility. She had just finished writing To Kill a Mockingbird, and was awaiting publication. She agreed to accompany Capote to act as what he called his "assistant researchist". Her affable southern manner ? she and Capote were childhood friends from Monroeville, Alabama ? made for a much happier connection with the plain-spoken inhabitants of Holcomb. Rupp recalls that in the one interview he granted Capote, most of the questions were asked by Harper Lee, so much so that "sometimes I wonder who really wrote that book".
Delores Hope, who in 1959 was a columnist for the local paper, the Garden City Telegram, also noted Harper Lee's vital role. "Nelle sort of managed Truman, acting as his guardian or mother. She broke the ice for him."
Delores and her husband, Cliff Hope, were also crucial ice-breakers. Hope was the Clutters' family lawyer, and arranged for Capote to look around River Valley farm so he could describe firsthand the murder scene. He is one of the few people acknowledged by Capote at the start of the book.
As Christmas approached in 1959, Delores took pity on Capote and Harper Lee, imagining them sitting in their hotel rooms with nowhere to go. So she invited them to Christmas lunch. "We asked them to come over at one o'clock," recalls Cliff. "Truman said: 'We'll be there at two.'"
Capote arrived at the Hopes' doorstep clutching a bottle of J&B whisky for his own consumption, and from the minute he stepped indoors, as Delores puts it, "he pretty well took over the conversation".
While Capote held forth, Harper Lee accompanied Delores into the kitchen, where they bonded over cooking a goose. They became great friends, and remain in touch to this day, despite Harper Lee's reputation, at the age of 83, for being reclusive.
The Hopes still live in the same house where they welcomed the odd couple. The simple wooden home, with its postwar furniture, has changed remarkably little, as if stuck in 1959. As they describe Capote's effervescent monologue, you can almost see him sitting on the beige cloth couch, legs crossed, waving his arms around as if starring in his own movie.
With the help of the Hopes, Capote and Harper Lee went on to inveigle themselves into the lives of other key figures in town, notably the Deweys with whom Capote became lifelong friends. He and Harper Lee were at the Deweys' house on the night when news came through that the killers had been arrested in Las Vegas. The extent to which Capote won over key figures of the community was such that when he left to return to New York in January 1960 after his first tranche of research, he told a friend: "At first it was hard. But now I'm practically the mayor!"
Yet there are few visible relics of of Capote's time in Kansas. In Holcomb, there is River Valley farm that still looks on the exterior largely as he described it. It now belongs to its third set of owners since the Clutters, the Maders; they used to give tours of the property but grew so bothered by the endless stream of In Cold Blood pilgrims that they posted the "stop" sign.
In Garden City, the Wheat Lands motel where Capote and Harper Lee stayed, is still there, though a photo of Capote posing in front of the building has been stolen from the foyer. The courthouse where Smith and Hickock were put on trial still stands as imposing as it was then. In the cemetery there are three neat tombstones, all bearing the date 1959: Herb and Bonnie together in the centre, Kenyon on the right and Nancy to the left. Someone has left a vase of blue cloth flowers; it has tumbled over.
Those signs apart, the local community is barely recognisable 50 years on. The family farm as the prime social unit, of which the Clutters' was the epitome, has declined and given way to huge mechanised operations producing animal feed. Holcomb, population 270 in 1959, has grown tenfold and is now dominated by one of the world's largest meat-packing factories. It is the last sad irony of Herb Clutter that just a few years after his own violent death, his way of life died too.
For Truman Capote the outcome of his sojourn in west Kansas was decidedly mixed. In Cold Blood, which he immodestly heralded as a new form of non-fiction novel, was received with delirious approval; Norman Mailer dubbed Perry as one of the great characters in American literature. The book earned its author more than $2m, which he used to buy homes in Manhattan, the Hamptons, Palm Springs and Switzerland. But by all accounts such heavenly success also went to his head, and contributed to his downward spiral in a haze of lavish parties, drink and drugs. He failed to write another substantial work, and died in 1984.
In Holcomb and Garden City, some of the residents welcomed his book. Alvin Dewey, the chief police investigator, championed it to the end. The Hopes too remain fans, cherishing the first-edition copy that Capote autographed for them. But many in the town continue to resent its intrusion, and refuse to talk about it or any of the subsequent films. Cliff Hope puts the ongoing hostility down to Capote's unblinking portrayal of the killers. "Many people thought he should have written about the Clutter family, rather than the murderers."
Delores's theory is that some local people have closed minds. "There will always be people who think it's none of anybody's business to come out here and write about their affairs. You will never change their opinions."
Bob Rupp has a third view. He says he has never read In Cold Blood, nor seen the movies, and never will. But he believes that Capote was unfair to the Clutters, because he left to posterity a memory of them that is dominated by the gruesome manner of their deaths rather than the wonderful accomplishments of their lives. He still thinks about the Clutters often, hence his idea for the memorial. But he has moved forward. He married in 1963 and now has four children and eight grandchildren.
So does he think that Capote's fateful arrival in Holcomb all those years ago has in the long run damaged the town? "I don't know it's really been damaging. I don't think he did the Clutter family justice, is all."
Dewey, who nailed the killers and became Capote's good friend, was asked the same question before he died in 1987. "What happened, happened," was his answer. "Four good people were murdered. An author came and wrote a book about it. In all communities, things happen. Good and bad. Those are the facts."
Thirty people will be shot dead in America today. On average. It could be more. If it¡¯s less, then more will die tomorrow. Or the next day.
The United States¡¯s gun homicide rate is 25 times higher than other high-income countries, according to a recent study.
Americans are divided on whether the country¡¯s gun deaths could be reduced through tougher laws on gun ownership. Liberals argue that legal restrictions on gun ownership could save lives. Conservatives say that tougher gun laws would do nothing to change the behaviour of violent criminals.
Even the 2012 Sandy Hook school shooting that left 20 first-graders dead was not enough to convince American lawmakers to pass new gun control laws, with many people seeing the ownership of guns as a crucial check on government tyranny. The country¡¯s highest court has ruled that outright bans on civilian ownership of handguns are unconstitutional.
After similar mass shootings, other countries have taken more dramatic steps to regulate gun ownership. A look at four countries show that tougher gun laws have been central to these efforts, but that enforcement and culture may also play important roles in preventing violence.
From the moment 43-year-old Thomas Hamilton unloaded his legally held arsenal of handguns on children and staff at Dunblane primary school on 13 March 1996, gun control was on the cards.
Nothing like Dunblane ? a massacre of 16 five- and six-year-olds, along with the teacher who tried to protect them ? had taken place before in Britain. The shock and collective grief of the whole nation resonated from the northernmost point of Scotland to the tip of Cornwall. This was not the United States, where by 1996, classroom shootings had occurred in many places including Nashville, San Diego and South Carolina.
As grief turned to a national anger, public debate focused on how someone like Hamilton, a former Scout leader who had been ostracised because of his suspicious behaviour with young boys, had been allowed to own such lethal weapons.
Public petitions, most notably by the Snowdrop Campaign, founded by friends of the bereaved families, called for a total ban on the private ownership and use of handguns in the UK. Signed by 750,000 people it was symbolic of the weight of public opinion.
Nine years before Dunblane, there had been Hungerford, where Michael Ryan went on a rampage through the Berkshire town, killing 16 people in a series of random shootings before turning the gun on himself. He had been carrying a handgun and two semi automatic rifles, for which he had firearms certificates.
The aftermath of Hungerford brought to an end the right to own semi-automatic firearms in Britain; they were banned along with pump action weapons, and registration became mandatory for shotgun owners.
With Dunblane the focus turned to handguns ? held by tens of thousands who took part in pistol shooting across the country. The Conservative then prime minister, John Major, passed the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997 after the Cullen inquiry into the massacre. It banned all cartridge ammunition handguns, except 22 calibre single-shot weapons.
But with the landslide election of Labour and Tony Blair the same year, the law was tightened further, and the remaining .22 cartridge handguns were also banned. The decision, supported by a majority of the public, all but wiped out target shooting as a sport in the UK.
Dave Thompson, chief constable of the West Midlands, and the lead on gun crime for the National Association of Chief Constables, said: ¡°The legislation coincided very well with a culture.¡±
Overnight, however, about 200,000 owners of handguns, most of whom kept them for pistol shooting, found their weapon banned and their pastime wiped out. All small-bore pistols and rifles used by target shooters were included in the ban. Penalties for anyone in possession of an illegal firearm were tough - from heavy fines to prison terms of 10 years.
The hostility of those involved in the sport to what they term the draconian legislation is still strong, 20 years after Dunblane. Mike Wells, secretary of the Sportsman¡¯s Association of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, set up in 1996 to counter public pressure for a ban on handguns, said politicians had been driven by a need to show they were doing something but their actions did nothing to stop the criminal use of guns. ¡°It never, never has any effect. The criminal underworld in England, the drug dealers ¡¦ have all got guns, but they are illegal guns,¡± he said.
Mark Mastaglio, an expert on firearms who worked for the Forensic Science Service for 20 years, said there was no evidence that the ban on handguns after Dunblane had done anything to cut the criminal use of firearms. ¡°It was very rare that there was ever leakage from the licensed gun owners to the criminal fraternity. Most guns used by criminal are either illegally imported or converted weapons. And that remains the case today,¡± said Mastaglio.
Crime statistics in the years after the ban was introduced appear to support the theory that it had little impact. Gun crime rose sharply, to peak at 24,094 offences in 2003/4. After that the number of crimes in which a firearm was involved fell consistently, to 4,779 offences in 2013. In the year ending September 2015 there was a small rise of 4% to 4,994 offences.
Thompson said the legislation was only part of it: law enforcement agencies had to prove they would carry through on the tough penalties and there was also poor policing of gang areas, and poor ballistics records and analysis. Both were addressed in the early 2000s, when there was a huge decline in gun crime, he said.
But there has been only one mass shooting in the UK ? in Whitehaven, Cumbria, in 2010, during which Derrick Bird killed 12 people ? since Dunblane.
Mastaglio said: ¡°Dunblane was certainly a turning point. It was a huge piece of legislation, and had a huge impact on registered gun owners in the UK. We now have one of the most stringent set of firearms legislation in the world ? only Japan has tougher laws.¡±
Japan has what may be the closest any country comes to ¡°zero-tolerance¡± of gun ownership ? a policy that experts say contribute its enviously low rates of gun crime. As of 2011, legal gun ownership stood at 271,000, according to police records, in a country of 127 million people.
There were six reported gun deaths in Japan in 2014, according to the National Police Agency. In 2006 just two people were killed in gun attacks; when the number rose to 22 in 2007 it prompted a bout of national soul-searching.
In his seminal 1993 paper for the Asia Pacific Law Review, whose conclusions still hold true more than 20 years later, David Kopel described Japanese gun control laws as ¡°the most stringent in the democratic world¡±.
The 1958 law on the possession of swords and firearms states: ¡°No one shall possess a firearm or firearms or a sword or swords.¡± Among the few exceptions are shotguns, but here too, the restrictions would cause outrage among American gun owners.
Before they can even lay hands on a shotgun for hunting and sport shooting, prospective owners must attend classes and pass written and practical exams. They must then undergo psychological assessments to determine they are fit to own a firearm. Police background checks are exhaustive and even extend to the gun owners¡¯ relatives.
The aim, according to Kopel, is to make possession of a shotgun so complex and drawn out that few people believe it worthwhile applying for one.
Civilian ownership of handguns is banned. The few violations reported in the media usually involve members of the country¡¯s many crime syndicates who have managed to smuggle them in from abroad.
But Japan was not always a low-crime, gun-intolerant nation. Guns quickly became the weapon of choice for feuding warlords after Portuguese traders introduced them to the country¡¯s south-west in the early 1500s. Over time, Japan improved the design and performance of firearms and began mass producing them.
The beginning of the end of widespread gun ownership came when the feudal warlord Toyotomi Hideyoshi (1537-1598) unified Japan, then disarmed the peasant population by banning civilians from owning swords and firearms in 1588.
¡°The shogunate banned them because they were fearful of the consequences of having guns in hands of an angry populace,¡± said Robert Whiting, author of Tokyo Underworld. The quid pro quo, Whiting added, was that the general population¡¯s safety would be assured provided they paid their taxes.
The notion that gun ownership should be limited to the authorities survived Japanese militarism and carried through to the postwar period. Japanese police officers did not begin carrying pistols until 1946, with the permission of the US-led occupation authorities.
Despite sporadic outbreaks of gun violence, Japan¡¯s yakuza crime syndicates are reluctant to build up caches of firearms. Threatening a rival with a gun is often seen as an ¡°unmanly¡± departure from the yakuza¡¯s traditional code of honour, to which even modern-day mobsters try to adhere, according to Whiting.
Kopel says Japan¡¯s gun laws do not necessarily prevent criminals ? especially the yakuza ? from acquiring guns. But, he added, even gangsters ¡°see themselves as within the social system, in a broad sense. Even when breaking the law, they still play by certain rules of society.¡±
Eerily, Australia¡¯s moment of truth also occurred almost exactly 20 years ago, when a shooting spree in a gift shop in Port Arthur, Tasmania, resulted in 35 people dying in about half an hour. It was the worst mass shooting by one person in Australia¡¯s history. The killer, Martin Bryant, received a sentence of 35 terms of life imprisonment.
Less than two weeks later, Australia¡¯s then prime minister, John Howard, announced a sweeping package of gun reforms in a country where guns had long been considered an essential prop in the national mythology of life in the bush.
¡°Port Arthur we acted on,¡± said Tim Fischer, then Howard¡¯s deputy prime minister. ¡°The USA is not prepared to act on their tragedies.¡±
Before Port Arthur, most states had a weak licensing system and no requirement to register guns. Howard proposed each state and territory should introduce and enforce a firearm licensing and registration system which required people to have a ¡°genuine reason¡± for having a firearm, such as sport or target shooting, recreational hunting or being a farmer.
Howard also introduced a national gun buyback policy for all weapons that did not comply, which led to the buying and melting down of more than 650,000 firearms at a cost of A$350m (now ¡Ì185m). One study said the buyback cut the rate of firearm suicides by 74% in the first 10 years.
There have been no mass shootings in the 20 years since Port Arthur; in the 20 years before the massacre there had been 13.
However, since the 1996 National Firearms Agreement, four states have moved to wind back the mandatory 28 days ¡°cooling off¡± period between applying for and buying a gun, a trend Howard has described as disturbing.
One of those states was Tasmania.
Germany¡¯s relationship with firearms is intriguing: while there are a lot of guns in the country, they don¡¯t seem to kill a lot of people.
Germany has one of the highest weapons-per-head rates in the world. In 2014, 5.5m legal weapons were registered as being in the hands of 1.45 million private individuals. The country¡¯s police union estimates the number of illegal weapons in the country to be considerably higher, around 20m. According to GunPolicy.org, this puts Germany at 15th place out of 175 nations in terms of guns per capita.
Gun ownership is more widespread in the west of the country than in the former East Germany, where private gun ownership was illegal before the fall of the Berlin Wall. Recent reports suggest that gun ownership is rapidly increasing still: between November 2015 and February 2016 alone, 20,000 applications were filed for new gun licences.
Yet in Germany gun homicide rate is one of the lowest in Europe: a death rate of 0.05 per 1,000 people, compared with 3.34 in the US. In fact, incidents of gun crime, including both weapons being fired and used to threaten people, have declined by almost a quarter since 2010 (pdf).
Experts put this trend down to a number of tweaks to gun law in the wake of high-profile shootings.
In 2002, a 19-year-old student in the Thuringian state capital, Erfurt, shot dead 16 people at the school that had recently expelled him, using weapons he had obtained from his gun club.
Within a year, the law regulating access to guns had been changed: Germany is the only country in the world where anyone under the age of 25 who applies for their first firearms licence must undergo a psychiatric evaluation with a trained counsellor, involving personality and anger management tests.
Experienced hunters or sports shooters over the age of 25 may be called in for psychiatric tests if they display certain kinds of behaviour, such as being caught drink-driving.
A further tweak to the gun law in 2008 means that inherited guns have to be fitted with a state-of-the-art blocking mechanism, making them unusable.
There were calls for even more stringent laws after 17-year-old Tim Kretschmer shot dead 15 at a school in Winnenden near Stuttgart in March 2009. Kretschmer had obtained his weapons from an arsenal of 15 guns kept by his father, who was a member of a shooting club.
Under the newly amended weapons act, it is now harder for individuals to own multiple weapons. A national gun register was established for the first time in 2013 ? previously, records of gun ownership were kept only at regional level.
Police officers can now also visit registered gun owners¡¯ home for spot checks without warning. Guns in private possessions have to be locked away in a safe, with the security code or location of the key known only to the owner of the gun.
A number of politicians went even further in the wake of the Winnenden massacre, calling for a complete ban on the storage of firearms in private homes. Even hunters or sportsmen, they argued, should have to deposit their arms at centralised depots.
The proposal was rejected after protests from hunters, who argued that they frequently need access to weapons at short notice, such as when wildlife was involved in traffic accidents.
The police watchdog investigating the death of Mark Duggan, whose shooting by police sparked the first bout of rioting in London on Saturday, has said it may have "inadvertently" misled journalists into believing the Tottenham man had fired at police.
Responding to inquiries from the Guardian, the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) said in a statement: "It seems possible that we may have verbally led journalists to believe that shots were exchanged".
Duggan, 29, was armed with a loaded handgun when he was shot dead by police after the minicab he was in was stopped during a planned operation to arrest him.
Investigators have established that two shots were fired by one CO19 firearms officer who was supporting Trident officers during the operation.
A postmortem concluded that Duggan was killed by a single gun shot to the chest. He also received a second gunshot wound to his right arm in the shooting at around 6.15pm in Tottenham Hale on 4 August.
A police officer was also injured after a bullet ? presumably from a ricochet ? lodged in his radio.
The alleged failure by the IPCC to provide Duggan's family and the local community with reliable information in the aftermath of his death was part of the reason the relatives protested outside the police station on Saturday.
The peaceful demonstration later descended into rioting and looting that, within days, had inspired "copycat" disorder across England.
Duggan's family and friends have said that if he was carrying a loaded weapon, they did not believe he would have fired at police.
The firearms officer who shot Duggan has said that he never claimed he was shot at and is understood to be upset that the family might have been misled into believing this. Investigations are ongoing into the fatal shooting. The IPCC is seeking witnesses to the incident as it attempts to piece together what happened.
Duggan was killed during an operation by Trident, which investigates gun crime. They had called in support from a specialist firearms team as a result of intelligence they had received.
The intention was to arrest Duggan, and police sources have said firearms officers were involved because of the perceived danger of the operation.
The IPCC's first statement about Duggan's death, issued four hours after he was pronounced dead, made no reference to shots fired at police.
However, at least one spokesman from the watchdog appears to have misinformed journalists, leading to reports that Duggan was killed by police after "firing first".
The Evening Standard said Duggan had been involved in a "shootout", adding that a "spokesman for the [IPCC] said it appeared the officer was shot first before police returned fire".
The Mirror quoted an IPCC spokesman saying: "We do not know the order the shots were fired. We understand the officer was shot first, then the male."
An article in the Independent made a similar claim. It reported: "It is understood that the officer was shot first, but this is not known for certain, an IPCC spokesperson said."
The IPCC statement said: "Analysis of media coverage and queries raised on Twitter have alerted to us to the possibility that we may have inadvertently given misleading information to journalists when responding to very early media queries following the shooting of Mark Duggan by MPS officers on the evening of 4 August."
Conceding it was possible it had issued information suggesting shots were exchanged, the IPCC added: "This was consistent with early information we received that an officer had been shot and taken to hospital. Any reference to an exchange of shots was not correct and did not feature in any of our formal statements, although an officer was taken to hospital after the incident."
Detectives have arrested a man after a clubber was shot dead at a London nightclub early Sunday morning.
The 35-year-old victim from west London was shot outside Club Red in Limehouse, east London. A man in his 20s handed himself in at a south London police station last night. He is in custody and being questioned.
The victim, who has not been named, is the 90th person murdered in the capital this year, police said. He had been attending a house music event with friends.
The man had multiple gunshot wounds and was pronounced dead at the scene.
The shooting is being investigated by officers from Operation Trident, which focuses on gun crime among young black people.
While concerns about London street violence have recently focused on knives, Trident has more than 300 officers working full-time on gun crimes.
Last week, a 17-year-old became the third teenager to be gunned down in Camden, north London, since May, fuelling fears of a turf war among local gangs. The victim was believed to have known Sharmaarke Hassan, also 17, who died two months ago after being shot in the head on a Camden estate. His death followed the shooting of an 18-year-old in the stomach in nearby Archway.
Last week it emerged that the latest fad among gun-wielding criminals is a tiny key-fob gun that can fit easily into the palm of the hand. On Friday, Marcus Henry, 27, from Clapham, south London, was jailed for nine years at the Old Bailey for shooting a man with one of the miniature weapons outside a nightclub in December 2007.
Police said it was the first example of the weapon being used.
Around 100 of the Bulgarian-made devices, designed to be used as flare guns, were imported into the UK a few years ago, and some have been converted to fire live 0.25-inch rounds.
Police say they may be even more dangerous than standard handguns because they can be more easily concealed.
¡°What¡¯cha think?¡± a colleague asked as we spilled onto the sidewalk outside a Manhattan screening room. ¡°I think I need two aspirin,¡± I said, clutching my throbbing head.
The critical reaction to John Wick: Chapter 2 has been quite positive. And I can understand why. Audiences get to pick and choose, but we critics, the brave soldiers of cinema¡¯s trenches hurling ourselves atop grenades to save you from a bad movie, suffer through more junk than you can possibly imagine, especially in the early months of the year. Director Chad Stahelski, cinematographer Dan Lausten, production designer Kevin Kavanaugh, stunt coordinator JJ Perry and their teams, it must be made abundantly clear, are wizards working at the top of their craft, and the leap in quality from typical action dreck to this is undeniable.
But eventually we¡¯ll need to ask: where does this end? Just because we can rattle our brains with bone-snapping, aorta-snipping, cranium-splashing violence, does that mean we have to? At what point does this hyperactive, blood-soaked, corpse-strewn video game aesthetic, however laudatory its choreography, cease being harmless entertainment and become psychologically invasive? And that¡¯s why I¡¯ve called you all to the PTA tonight.
OK, so I know like I sound like someone terrified of witchcraft lurking in heavy metal lyrics, but common sense (and my own viewing habits) have me convinced that desensitization to violence is a real thing. Years ago, watching a beat-down or shoot-out would send me into a white-knuckle sweat. Now I don¡¯t stop munching my popcorn. To put it bluntly, it took film-making this good to realize just how sick we¡¯ve all become.
John Wick: Chapter 2, a string of elaborate bullet ballets with only trace elements of a plot, is hardcore gun pornography, pure and simple. And when the imagery faded (along with the hoots ¡®n¡¯ hollers of the audience) I felt sunk in a crater of guilt, choking on a miasma of shame.
This specific film may seem like an unfair place to shout ¡°enough!¡± but its clear indication of intelligence is, in a weird way, doubly irksome. This is a movie that wants to have its shotgun blast to the head and eat it, too. In addition to a Seijun Suzuki hat-tip, John Wick: Chapter 2 is loaded with vague hints of some kind of meaning in its lean script.
In the first John Wick (which, yes, I awarded four stars back in 2014, back before I became so easily shellshocked, I guess) the big surprise was learning, as the picture progressed, that a larger, surreal underground of killers lived among us. The sequel leans into this to the point of absurdity; by the end it implies that nearly everyone in New York City is somehow tied into the criminal netherworld and its labyrinthine codes of conduct.
The world of John Wick includes a chain of fancy hotels serving as ¡°neutral ground¡± for killers who are currently ¡°working¡±, eg figuring out how to murder someone and, probably, their dozens of bodyguards and henchmen. Peter Serafinowicz plays the Roman ¡°sommelier¡± who actual deals in carbines, not cabernets.
A lustily shot sequence teases out one weapon after another and, to one who has never held a firearm and has no intention of doing so, each make and model just sounds like chrome noise. Until our hero was handed an enormous rifle in the AR family. Ah, that¡¯s one I¡¯ve heard of. I recognize it as the gun of choice in Newtown and Aurora and San Bernardino. (The Pulse dance club in Orlando fell to an MCX, the Pepsi to the AR-15¡¯s Coke.)
So, it¡¯s supposed to be funny when Keanu Reeves¡¯ John Wick and his nemesis (played by Common) have to temporarily call a truce when their brutal brawl crashes into the lobby of the Continental, but I dunno, that little dose of intentional comedy wasn¡¯t enough to wash the bloody taste out of my mouth.
The ¡°we¡¯re just joshing around¡± angle, in addition to making very little sense, just feels like a paint job, as does the lame final act twist of having a showdown at an art museum. Oh, it absolutely looks breathtaking (and shatters The Lady From Shanghai¡¯s broken glass count), but the mere presence of a recorded voice saying things about ¡°deeper reflections into the nature of self¡± doesn¡¯t actually impart any intellectual heft. In fact, some might say it makes you realize the waste of effort in this whole enterprise.
Stylized violence in movies isn¡¯t going away any time soon. Nor is it always uncalled for. The last movie I remember with so many gunshots to the head was Oliver Hirschbiegel¡¯s Downfall. But violent movies come into my life so regularly; I must have seen so many others brimming with vicious head kills since then. Yet Downfall is the one that keeps coming up because it was a rich story with urgent themes, historical resonance and dramatic tension. These high body-count brutality fests, even the cleverly made ones (like Hardcore Henry or The Raid 2) are ephemeral, and their mindlessness doesn¡¯t stick, no matter how many minds are shown sticking to the wall.
I don¡¯t think it¡¯s overly prudish to wonder just where the line of decency is as audience bloodlust continues to get chummed. Eventually, the moviegoer staggering out of a violent screening looking for headache tablets will be you.
There is a theory that the internet has conclusively done for rock and pop music's sense of myth and mystery, but?clearly no one told Abel Tesfaye, better known as the Weeknd. He is a very 2012 kind of pop star, who releases his material for free on the web, declines interviews and instead communicates with his audience entirely via a gnomic Twitter feed and a Tumblr headlined Til We Overdose, on which he posts new music, photos of himself looking impressively off his knackers ? boggling at the wreckage of a hotel room, fag in mouth; head in hands on the floor next to a bottle of cognac ? and, occasionally, worrying handwritten notes: "mama I understand why you're mad ? it hurts to accept what I am and how I live and what I did."
All of this is of a piece with his songs, which push Drake's self-examining take on the R&B loverman persona into more?disturbing territory. While Drake agonises over the shallowness of wealth and fame, Tesfaye's songs inhabit an actively amoral universe where some kind of drugged-out degradation is often taking place, usually in a hotel suite with its curtains drawn against the dawn. A frail vocalist in a genre packed with artists who can sing up a storm, Tesfaye and his producers are nevertheless spectacularly good at capturing a small-hours atmosphere that's both queasy and compelling. The dragging beats, washes of synthesiser and eclectic musical references ? chillwave and crunk hip-hop, Aaliyah and France Gall ? somehow contrive to sound not just eerie and desolate but cosseting as well, inexorably drawing the listener into a deeply troubling world.
Echoes of Silence is his third album in nine months, and it might be the most troubling of the lot. At its centre are XO/The Host ? a sneering, chilly dismissal of a groupie whose life has run out of control, with a great chorus, set to echoing electronics and drums that crack like gunshots ? and Initiation. The latter isn't the first Weeknd song about using drink and drugs to coerce an unwilling woman into group sex, but it's perhaps the most horrible ? rhythm clattering, the sweetness of the melody corrupted by the Auto-Tune effect that causes Tesfaye's voice to continually speed up and slow down. After it ends, it haunts you in the same way as a newspaper's graphic description of a crime or a disaster.
XO/The Host and Initiation sound like an artist boldly exploding one of modern pop's great myths and suggesting that what goes on in the VIP area is infinitely seedier and more unpleasant than the multitude of songs hymning its pleasures suggest. But more disturbing still are the?songs that surround them, because they seem to cloud Tesfaye's intention. With their talk of meteoric rises and bullish predictions of continued success The Fall and Same Old Song seem not to be about a character, but Tesfaye himself. The closing title track, a reverb-heavy piano ballad, features a protagonist dismissing yet another corrupted and distraught female ("you're such a masochist"), but it's mired in self-pity: "Don't go home ¡¦ don't leave my little life." The likelihood is that you're meant to think he is absolutely pathetic, to listen with your cheeks puffed out in disbelief. But taken?as the conclusion to an interlinked trilogy of albums, there's a slight but nagging suspicion that Tesfaye is genuinely trying to elicit some kind of sympathy ? he's certainly going all out on the impassioned vocal front ? and that he thinks he's raising an important point about the complex nature of victimhood. Will no one spare a thought for horrible, predatory men? They have?feelings, too, you know.
You're left unsettled, enthralled and confused, not least about where Tesfaye goes from here. It might be that he's simply playing a role: perhaps , despite the songs about inveigling drugged-out ladies into group sex and the photos of himself passed out, he's actually sitting at home under a slanket in front of The Great British Bake Off. If that's the case,?then Echoes of Silence and its two predecessors represent a pretty staggering achievement from a brilliantly provocative and daring new artist. Even so, he is going to have to come up with a new role soon. As David Bowie would tell you, you have to stay ahead of your audience: there's only so long you can inhabit a persona before it gets boring and self-parodic. Alternatively, there's the slim chance he might not be playing a role, or he might genuinely believe at least some of what he's singing. Of course, that wouldn't make the music on Echoes of Silence any less incredible, but it would mean the future of his recording career is some way down on a?list of problems at the top of which is: "Being an absolutely catastrophic arse of a man". For the moment, at least, Tesfaye isn't saying either way: it's all about the myth and mystery.
A man has died after being shot in Islington, north London.
Scotland Yard said gunshots were heard in Sunnyside Road on Saturday shortly before 9pm. Police and the London Ambulance Service found a 25-year-old man with a gunshot wound at the scene.
The man, who has not yet been formally identified, was taken to an east London hospital where he was pronounced dead early on Sunday. A police spokesman said his next of kin had been informed and a postmortem examination would be held. No arrests have been made.
In south London, a fourth man, aged 19, was arrested on Sunday in a murder inquiry after a 19-year-old was stabbed to death.Andre Aderemi was found with knife injuries in Heather Way in Selsdon, south Croydon, at 7:40pm last Tuesday. He died in hospital despite the efforts of paramedics and an air ambulance crew.
Three men, also 19, have already been charged with murder.
Jamall Longergan, of Woodcroft Road, Thornton Heath; Fabio Cela, of Fryston Avenue, Croydon; and Rodney Mukasa, of Greenview Avenue, Croydon, are due to appear at the Old Bailey on Tuesday.
Friends on social media have paid tribute to Aderemi.
Suzie Voce wrote: ¡°I¡¯m so sorry this happened. No one deserves this. My thoughts are with his family. RIP Andre. I always liked him through primary and secondary. I can¡¯t believe this happened. It¡¯s so so sad.¡±
Amy Macartney said: ¡°I can¡¯t stop thinking about this. Today it¡¯s really hit home that life is way too short. I can¡¯t imagine what Andre¡¯s family must be going through, my heart goes out to them.¡±
Aderemi¡¯s death came a day after Lance Scott Walker, 18, was fatally stabbed in Hayes, west London, while an onlooker screamed at his alleged attacker to stop. A witness said the teenager had been running for his life while covered in blood.
Nine people aged between 16 and 19 have died in knife attacks on London¡¯s streets this year.
On the morning of 6 February 2004, the eyes of Winston Salem fell upon Darryl Hunt, who had calmly waited for this day, uncertain if it would ever arrive. By noon that Friday, judge Anderson Cromer would exonerate the 38-year-old inmate for his role in the 1984 murder of Deborah Sykes; but first, he listened to her mother, Evelyn Jefferson, who berated him for a ruling that would ¡°set free a guilty man¡±.
Before Hunt left the courthouse, he turned toward Jefferson, his voice warbling with emotion, and told her: ¡°I feel the pain you felt.¡±
Starting that day, Hunt devoted his life to reforming a criminal justice system that had stripped him of nearly two decades of his life, becoming a globally known advocate for the wrongfully convicted with a similar kind of grace he showed Jefferson.
Last weekend, the 51-year-old advocate was found dead in a friend¡¯s locked pick-up truck with a gun in what police have deemed a suicide.
¡°Physical evidence found inside the vehicle, as well as other investigative findings thus far, is indicative of Darryl Hunt having suffered a self-inflicted gunshot wound,¡± Winston Salem police said in a statement.
The police force that found him was the same one that arrested him 32 years ago for the rape and murder of Sykes, a 25-year-old copy editor for the Winston-Salem Sentinel. When attorney Mark Rabil first met Hunt, he was struck by the teenager¡¯s peaceful demeanor and unfettered willingness to prove his innocence no matter the costs.
¡°I was scared,¡± Rabil recalls. ¡°Everything that had been in the media, [the police] said they had all these witnesses, and I assumed they had the guy, and our job was to save him from the death penalty. In my 35 years practicing law, there¡¯s never been this suddenness of me being convinced of innocence as I was in that first hour with Darryl.¡±
In 1985, Hunt was convicted of first-degree murder, but thanks to a lone juror, was spared the death penalty. However, a higher court overturned his conviction on a technicality, granting him his freedom in 1989. Faced with a retrial in rural Catawba County, prosecutors offered a plea bargain to Hunt that would have set him free. Rather that admit guilt, Hunt turned down the deal, leaving his fate in the hands of an all-white jury, which went on to convict him in 1990.
Four years later, DNA testing found Hunt¡¯s semen didn¡¯t match the evidence collected from the crime scene. But it wasn¡¯t until a series of appeals and another DNA test in December 2003 linked the crime to Willard Brown, who later confessed, that Hunt was released.
That Christmas Eve Hunt signed the papers for his release, and left the Forsyth County Jail for good.
Hunt, who would receive more than $2m in compensation from the city and state, immediately began to speak out about his wrongful conviction after his exoneration. Stephen Dear, executive director of People of Faith Against the Death Penalty, believed he had every right to retreat from the public spotlight. Instead of leaving Winston Salem behind, Hunt stayed so that no one would forget what had happened.
¡°His face was a reminder to the people who put him away,¡± Rabil says. ¡°Certain district attorneys would cross the street rather than face him. Everything would go quiet when he walked in a courtroom.¡±
Hunt founded the Darryl Hunt Project for Freedom and Justice to help exonerate wrongfully convicted individuals. Over the years, a documentary and two books would be released about his life. Hunt received countless offers to speak about his wrongful conviction, which turned him into a well-known criminal justice activist around the world.
¡°This community, locally and statewide, had such high expectations of him,¡± says Phoebe Zerwick, an investigative reporter who covered Hunt¡¯s case for the Winston-Salem Journal. ¡°It must have been a huge burden. At the same time, it gave him purpose.¡±
According to Dear, Hunt played a crucial role in turning North Carolina from a state that once had the fifth-highest execution rate to one that has had a moratorium in place for nearly a decade. Hunt also pushed for the passage of the North Carolina Racial Justice Act of 2009 that banned race from being used as a factor in determining whether someone should be executed. (State lawmakers would repeal the act in 2014.)
Ultimately, Dear says, Hunt¡¯s lasting impact may very well be that his case helped bring about the creation of the North Carolina¡¯s Innocence Inquiry Commission, a state agency tasked solely with investigating wrongful convictions. In nine years, the commission has exonerated nine inmates.
Theresa Newman, co-director of Duke University Law School¡¯s Wrongful Convictions Clinic, also watched Hunt¡¯s devotion to his cause in smaller arenas such as talking to students at law school orientations. Zerwick, who now teaches writing at Wake Forest University, said he was even willing to speak to her undergraduate freshmen students. That desire to help others trickled down to nearly every local person leaving prison who sought a smooth transition back into society. Though admirable, Newman says, Hunt also struggled to say no to people, even if it would be better for his health.
¡°He felt like he owed something and had to pay it back,¡± Newman says. ¡°I¡¯ve never met everyone who was more selfless. He never really took time for himself. He wasn¡¯t a good caregiver to himself.¡±
As the years passed, his friends watched the work take a toll on Hunt. At one point, Zerwick recalls, Hunt stopped watching the documentary that would screen before his panel discussions because it became ¡°too difficult to constantly relive that horrible experience.¡± Nevertheless, Hunt continued to ¡°give injustice a face and a name,¡± Newman said.
¡°He was the voice of the voiceless,¡± Rabil said, ¡°who was wounded by 20 years of wrongful incarceration and taking on the burdens of so many people and fighting systems that can¡¯t be changed in one lifetime.¡±
Over the past few years, Hunt fell upon a period of increasing hard luck that started with a divorce from his wife. In September 2014, April Hunt filed a domestic violence complaint in which he allegedly ¡°talked about how worthless he is and [that he] should die¡±. (Hunt¡¯s lawyer, David Hough, denied those claims at the time.) Soon after, Hunt left town for metro Atlanta in search of his long-lost sister. After finding her, Hunt rented a house in Jonesboro, Georgia, where he stayed with his sister and her teenage kids, all while he underwent treatment for prostate cancer.
In early 2016, Rabil said, Hunt returned to Winston Salem because he ¡°missed the work¡±. Upon moving back, he discovered his assets had been frozen, which led to the repossession of his truck due to a missed payment. As that happened, his cancer had advanced to a Stage IV prognosis. All the while, Hunt¡¯s depression seemed to grow, becoming increasingly evident to his friends, despite his private nature.
In the last month of his life, Hunt traveled to the University of Virginia for a speaking engagement at its public policy school. Though Rabil says he seemed ¡°distracted¡±, Hunt had planned to speak at a retreat for a new nonprofit called Healing Justice, which seeks to mend the ¡°extensive human damage¡± stemming from wrongful convictions,¡± and receive an award from the American Civil Liberties Union¡¯s North Carolina Chapter.
¡°He¡¯s always struggled,¡± Rabil said. ¡°But future things were being planned.¡±
A member of the SAS was shot dead with a type of bullet used by British troops while taking part in a night raid in Iraq, an inquest heard yesterday. Sergeant Jonathan Hollingsworth suffered a single gunshot wound to the chest during the operation to capture kidnappers suspected of holding contractors hostage.
Hollingsworth's inquest in Hereford, where the SAS is based, heard that the 5.56mm bullet that killed him was of a type used by British troops. None of the Iraqis detained had weapons capable of firing the bullet and nor was any such weapon found.
A man identified as Soldier B was the first to enter the dusty and dark building, where the suspected hostage-takers were holed up. He said: "I was in front of Jon when I went into the building. There were females with young children in there so there was a lot of screaming and shouting. As we were about to make entry into room three there was a lot of commotion.
"I was first into that room and saw some males in there and I was calling for Jon to back me up because I felt exposed and then Jon said 'I need a medic'.
"That came as a total surprise to me because I hadn't heard any gunshots or anything like that. In my opinion the gunshot could have come from anywhere but at the time I thought it came from the corridor. I didn't hear it go off but it could well have happened at the same time as other devices we were using, which made loud noises."
Fellow soldiers attempted to save Hollingsworth, 35, before he was rushed to a nearby field hospital and pronounced dead at around 2.55am on November 24 2006. A postmortem examination revealed that the fatal 5.56mm bullet was of type RG98 or RG99, which were issued to British troops until the year 2000.
The inquest was told that British soldiers involved in the Basra operation were carrying 5.56mm rifles but with ammunition of a different type, which had only been made since 2005.
The coroner, David Halpern, asked the commander of the operation, Soldier H: "Were any weapons capable of firing such a bullet found in the premises or did you see any Iraqis carrying any such weapons?"
He replied: "No sir" and added: "My weapon does fire a 5.56mm bullet but it is common knowledge that insurgents also have 5.56mm ammunition."
Another of Hollingsworth's colleagues, Soldier M, said he did hear a gunshot. But he added: "The shot I heard was a much quieter noise than a 5.56mm makes, much quieter than that. The next thing I heard was the words shouted 'man down' almost immediately after hearing the shot."
Every soldier who gave evidence spoke to confirm that they did not fire their weapons during the assault but the coroner called for extra evidence to be made available by the MoD. He wants records of the ammunition issued to the soldiers in an attempt to categorically prove they were not carrying RG98 or RG99 bullets.
A man was arrested by police yesterday in connection with the murder of a 15-year-old boy who was shot as he stood talking with a group of friends in Derby.
Kadeem Blackwood, nicknamed Snipes, was wounded in the chest on Tuesday night after he and his friends got into an argument with another group. He died at Derbyshire royal infirmary.
Derbyshire's assistant chief constable, Peter Goodman, said: "We are now gaining a clearer picture of what happened that night. We understand that Kadeem was walking through the park with a group of friends when they were approached by another group of males. Some sort or argument occurred and a shot was fired. At which stage, a number of males involved in the incident ran off."
Armed police, a police helicopter and dog units were scrambled to the area after the shooting at 9.20pm.
Forensic science teams worked in the autumn sun yesterday as the road was cordoned off with police tape and a white tent covered the site of the shooting.
A friend of Kadeem's said: "This is serious shit. It's crazy, this is Derby you know, not New York."
Neighbours expressed their shock. A group of youngsters said there had been gang tensions during the summer, but they had recently dissipated. A young woman who would not give her name said Kadeem was "bubbly, had a good sense of humour and was always up for a good time. He liked dancing and skanking to a 4x4 bassline."
Kadeem looked older than his years because he was so tall and well-built. He loved boxing and trained at a nearby gym, his friends said.
The young woman said the gangs were "like a street family. We are just a big group of people who go to each other's homes and to the studio to do music. The people who did this [shooting] took it too far."
"Now they have shot him it is obviously going to get worse," a teenage boy said.
He claimed: "Guns are so easy to get. You can make one phone call and 10 to 15 minutes later you have got yourself a gun for ¡Ì40." He blamed the trouble on drugs. "It is to do with the weed," he added.
Kadeem left Chellaston foundation school in December. The headteacher, Ray Ruszczynski, said he was a popular boy and it was "very sad when tragedies like this take place, especially in someone so young like Kadeem".
Assistant chief constable Goodman, said: "This is a major incident - fatal shootings are not commonplace in the city of Derby." He said that a 19-year-old man had been arrested in Derby, and was questioned throughout the day.
"We have had a number of incidents and we have gained a number of significant convictions in relation to these," Goodman said. He said the most recent incident had been five months ago, when a window was damaged in a firearm incident.
"It's too early to state the motive or comment on speculation, but I would like to appeal to the people of Derby to come forward and tell us anything they know."
A 15-year-old boy said: "There was a gang with him, and there was a lot of arguing. I heard the gunshot and I came running down and I saw the gang and he was lying on the floor."
Kadeem's father, Steven Blackwood, said in a statement last night: "Kadeem's untimely death at such a tender age should send a message to all young people, not only in Derby but on a national scale, that this violence has to stop. The family are now reminiscing on the Kadeem we knew and loved."
Emergency services were only called for Yetunde Price after her friend, who was in violation of his parole, had driven to a house in Long Beach, at least 20 minutes away.
A spokesman for the LA sheriff's department said yesterday that Ms Price had been seriously wounded and it was not clear whether swifter treatment would have had made any difference. He said that there are a number of trauma centres in the area the shooting took place.
A man was arrested yesterday in the Los Angeles area in connection with the murder.
Police were still seeking at least two other men as members of the Williams family arrived in LA, describing it as "the saddest day of our lives."
"We are shocked, saddened and devastated by the shooting death of our beloved Yetunde," a statement said. "She was our nucleus and our rock. She was personal assistant, confidant and advisor to her sisters and her death leaves a void that can never be filled."
Yetunde Price, 31, a nurse who worked as a personal assistant to her tennis-playing sisters, was shot dead in the early hours of Sunday morning after a row in the street in Compton, a suburb south of downtown LA, where Venus and Serena Williams grew up before moving to Florida.
Ms Price, the single mother of three young children, was in a white utility vehicle with a friend, Rolland Wormley, aged 28, when there was an argument in the street with a group of men shortly after midnight.
Up to 20 shots were fired, according to neighbours, and Ms Price was hit in the chest.
Wormley, who was in the area in breach of parole conditions connected to a firearms offence, then drove the car from the scene to a relative's home before calling an ambulance. Ms Price was pronounced dead on arrival at the Long Beach Memorial medical centre.
Heavily armed members of the Los Angeles County sheriff's Special Enforcement Bureau and the local Compton police gang unit moved into the area and surrounded a known gang house which was raided and found to be empty.
A raid on another house in the street where the shooting took place led to the arrest of Aaron Michael Hammer, aged 24, who was yesterday being held without bail on suspicion of murder. An assault rifle was found at the scene, according to police. Hammer is likely to appear in court this morning.
Ms Price's mother, Gracene Price, and the two tennis-playing sisters, flew to LA as soon as they heard of the murder. Venus had been in New York and Serena had been in Toronto where she was said to have been working on a television film called Street Time in which she was playing the part of a reformed gang member.
Yetunde Price is a half-sister to the Williams, her own father, Yusef Rasheed having died. There are two other older sisters, Isha, a lawyer and Lyndrea, a singer and actress.
Ms Price was often seen cheering Venus and Serena at tennis tournaments and recently accompanied them to award ceremonies. She lived in Corona, a suburb of LA, about 20 miles from the scene of the murder where neighbours described her as a model parent of her three children who are aged five, nine and eleven.
Lt Daniel Rosenberg of the LA County sheriff's department said police were seeking at least two other men who were believed to have been involved in the incident. Compton, which became in the 1960s the first city in the state to have an African American majority, has long been plagued by gang shootings.
Istanbul is on high alert after a gunman opened fire on partygoers at a New Year¡¯s Eve celebration in one of the most popular nightclubs in Istanbul, killing 39 people and wounding 69.
Turkey¡¯s interior minister, Suleyman Soylu, said the attacker was still on the loose. Earlier government reports had said the attack was carried out by a lone gunman who was killed by police. Witness accounts in Turkish media appeared to describe more than one attacker.
No group has claimed responsibility for the attack at the Reina club, in the Ortakoy district of the city, but Turkish authorities called it an ¡°act of terror¡±.
Istanbul¡¯s governor, Vasip Sahin, said: ¡°At 1.15am, a terrorist carrying a long-barrelled weapon martyred the police officer waiting outside, and then martyred another citizen to enter. He then carried out this violent and cruel act by spraying bullets on innocent people who were celebrating the new year.¡±
Twenty-five of the dead were men and 14 were women. Selina Do?an, an MP with the CHP party who toured the hospitals and the morgue, said they included 11 Turks and 24 foreigners from Iraq, Kuwait, India, Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Lebanon and Israel, a Belgian citizen who is originally Turkish, and a Canadian-Iraqi.
On Sunday morning the scene was cordoned off and police officers with riot shields blocked the road leading to the club, which is situated next to a bridge across the Bosphorus. Ambulances shuttled the wounded to nearby hospitals.
A man waiting for word of his brother who worked at the club said: ¡°We hope he is fine. My sister called me with the news that there was an attack and we put on our clothes and rushed here. It was really hard because no taxis wanted to go here.¡±
Local media described scenes of chaos at the time of the attack, including people jumping into the Bosphorus to evade the gunfire. The private NTV news channel said the assailant had entered the club dressed in a Father Christmas outfit.
Outside Sisli Etfal hospital, Sinem Uyanik said she had been at the club with her husband, who was wounded in the attack. ¡°Before I could understand what was happening, my husband fell on top me,¡± she said. ¡°I had to lift several bodies from on top of me before I could get out. It was frightening.¡± She said her husband¡¯s condition was not serious.
Turkey has endured numerous terror attacks over the past year by Islamic State militants and Kurdish separatist groups. Three weeks ago a twin bombing outside the football stadium in the district of Besiktas killed 46 people, most of them police officers, two hours after a football match.
On Sunday large number of police officers were deployed throughout Istanbul, particularly the districts surrounding Ortakoy. Istiklal Avenue, a street that is popular with tourists, had a large police presence, with police cars and officers keeping watch.
The White House condemned the ¡°savagery¡± of the attack. The National Security Council spokesman Ned Price said: ¡°The United States condemns in the strongest terms the horrific terrorist attack at a nightclub in Istanbul, which has left dozens dead and many more wounded. That such an atrocity could be perpetrated upon innocent revellers, many of whom were celebrating New Year¡¯s Eve, underscores the savagery of the attackers.¡±
General knowledge paper 2013-2014, sat by the pupils of King William's College, Isle of Man
1 what famous club was founded at Vrijstraat 20?
2 where, innovatively, were both events made bipartite?
3 where did the Emperor of India lose his uncle to a single gunshot?
4 which authority on tubes was elected to the presidency at Burlington House?
5 who established the relation between an element's X-ray frequency and its atomic number?
6 the celebration of the arrival of which migrant parasite took place for the first time in a Saxon city?
7 after increasing problems in EC4, whose grand vernal display moved to SW3?
8 which boy was born and would compose a nominal reminder 20 years later?
9 who served which country as president for less than one hour?
10 what might perhaps have anticipated Tom and Jerry?
4 was the little old painter of the hospital?
5 was so-named because his brother was portly?
6 was so-named because his father was a gardener?
7 was so-named because he liked to paint birds?
2 Who loved his country and loved his lass?
3 A long-legged bird flew over three Chinamen carved in what?
4 Who forgot cruelly that even lovers are not immune from drowning?
5 Whose pupils would range from round to crescent and crescent to round?
6 Where would I build a modest home and live in solitude, growing beans and keeping bees?
7 Whose purity was likened favourably to a tall candle before the crucifix?
8 Who wore small holes in his shoes and large holes in his gown?
9 Where were the fiddler's cousin and brother priests?
10 Where did my cap acquire a halfpenny?
1 did Loring fight with the crippled Paul de la Fosse?
2 was MgSO .7H O found to be of therapeutic benefit?
3 did Blanche save the doomed Neville by clinging to the clapper of the curfew bell?
4 did the riders encounter the gouty Lord Winterton approaching the churchyard steps?
5 did the rector combine his clerical duties with those of a royal appointment at Greenwich?
6 according to the diarist, did Alice catch and eat a jack pike when expecting a future archbishop?
7 was which composer's body interred in St Peter's churchyard nearly a year after his death?
8 was the chalky grave in which the former NSW justice minister's victim was found?
9 does an edifice recall, nominally, an Uttar Pradesh mausoleum?
1 Which one is 140 not out?
2 Which was formerly noteworthy as Northworthy?
4 Which is the Glaswegian intruder amongst the Mancunians?
5 Where, alphabetically, is there a hiatus between the 15th and the third?
6 Which, according to Tacitus, should be more appropriately located 50 miles south?
7 Which intended Scandinavian sounds to have Mercian ancestry instead?
8 Which is arrived at by adding the eight to the 24?
9 Which three took 30 years to become 14?
10 which might have been named Zarah?
2 did the schismatic antipope spend his final years?
3 did di Luna unknowingly order the execution of his brother?
4 did Jack and Stephen meet during an Italian quartet in Government House?
5 did the future Superior General suffer significant injuries to both legs during the siege?
6 did a 1930s traveller find a scruffy little town, built round an open drain and smelling of fruit skins and rotten fish?
7 did el Bueno throw down his dagger to the besiegers for the execution of his son?
8 did Brother Bernard poison the garrison with white arsenic?
9 was the bastion blown up by a Christmas pudding?
1 Who, in his delusion, discovered on a dateless day, that he was the King of Spain?
2 Which narrator enjoyed oysters, cake, and cheese following the burial of his brother on 18 March?
3 Which diarist described a new pastime on Wednesday 13 January, namely, filling packets with powdered gravy?
4 In which travelogue were the erratic movements of a goat, chased by a dog, a boy and his parents, witnessed on Saturday 24th?
5 Which self-styled intellectual wrote of driving through Glasgow at 11am on 26 August and counting 27 drunks in one mile?
6 In what journal does the author boast of eating a penny twelfth cake on Thursday 6 January at every suitable shop between St?Paul's and the Exchange?
7 Which diarist sorrowfully quoted from Pablo Neruda, following the death of the best man of the force, and one of its pillars, on 25 April?
8 Which traveller, having earlier witnessed the hanging of two men, determined on 22 October to petition for the repeal of the law?
9 Who pondered on 27 April on the peculiarity of Going's always coming and Cummings' always going?
10 Who recorded being shown the Onacratulus of Pliny at Rotterdam on 13 August?
1 "It is the largest piece of artificial water in the kingdom"?
2 "¡¦ employed in the salmon and eel fisheries, and manufacture of?paper, soap, candles and leather"?
3 "¡¦ several important mines ¡¦ producing tin, copper, nickel, with clay, and china stone for the Staffordshire potteries"?
4 "Excellent bacon and hams are cured here, and vast numbers of small cattle pass this way to be fattened for market in Norfolk and Essex"?
5 "A bath-house has been built over some valuable springs which rise from the pits, and are very beneficial in cases of scrofula and similar complaints"?
6 "¡¦ one mass of dilapidation and filth; the old crumbling houses being used by the poor wherever they can find something like a roof to cover them"?
7 "¡¦ by day it will be found dirty and irregularly built, without order or management, decent roads or footpaths, no supply of water"?
8 "¡¦ there are no roadside inns worth the name; the ale is wretched stuff, and it is safest to take provisions with you on an excursion"?
9 "¡¦ formerly noted for wire works, but now a seat of the linen trade, especially diapers, drills, ducks, ticks etc"?
10 "No particular manufacture, but celebrated for its cakes and brawn"?
2 did Spicer survive an attack by Colleoni's mob?
3 was the programme suspended following shocking events?
4 did races begin when a widower occupied the English throne?
5 did a Hampshire batsman and county captain suffer fatal injuries in a fall?
6 did James Stanley pre-empt his somewhat Strange descendant by 153 years?
7 was a race renamed in honour of the course's founder, 219 years later?
8 did Foxhall win in the year of the benefactor's assassination?
9 was a race inaugurated by a future Governor of St Lucia?
10 uniquely, were there no finishers?
4 did three worn steps lead to Sir?Joseph's front door?
5 does the man from Bow walk down gloved and un-gloved?
6 did Holmes sustain two lacerated scalp wounds in a "murderous attack"?
7 had Archie opened his house and roosted in a corner of it?
8 do the red trams and brown trams pour down?
9 is the house which Belloc could not afford?
10 do you walk your flowery way?
2 was given a septet of names?
4 was his mother's 16th and last child, yet still succeeded his father as king?
5 was born prematurely at the Furstenhof due to her mother's pleurisy, and died the same day?
6 was born in the precinct of the Collegiate Church of St Peter, where his mother had taken refuge?
7 was the younger of twin boys, but still became king on his father's death?
8 was rumoured to have been substituted for live coals?
9 would be known to the family as Pussy?
10 was like the 11th Hussars?
1 Which 15-year-old missed which target in Bologna?
2 Who fired a bullet into which male cervid without obvious ill-effect?
3 Which epileptic farmer failed with two pistol shots to kill which segregationist leader?
4 Whose paper-knife failed, just, to puncture whose aorta at a book-signing at Blumstein's?
5 Whose wedding day was interrupted by an explosive bouquet thrown from a balcony by which librarian?
6 Whose premature closing of his 16th anniversary speech saved him from whose time-bomb by 13?minutes?
7 Which leader, together with a number of spacemen, survived a shooting by which army deserter?
8 Which priest failed to kill which senior cleric with a bayonet at a famous Marian shrine?
9 Who missed which target when attending one of Colley Cibber's plays?
10 who launched his Suzuki Swift at which monarch's bus, but missed?
1 When do we smother our feelings with difficulty?
2 Who was rescued from Prince Rupert Sound by Diefenbaker?
3 Who offered 1,000 guineas for the copyright of A Tale of Flodden Field?
4 Whose appointment to lead the Kingdom's force was a first for her gender?
5 Who became Lord High Constable following the murder of her libertine father?
6 Which former Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man received a constabulary appointment?
7 Who suggested to his monarch giving the vineyards to a barbarous people?
8 Who had his thumb nearly chewed off by the huge and hideous mulatto?
10 Who had houses at 35 Charlotte Street and at Well Walk?
1 What comes in Bali's bottle?
3 Where does the warm water bubble up in Transcaucasia?
4 Where is water, named after the Roman goddess of public welfare, extracted?
5 Where does the bottle depict a naked man, walking away, carrying two buckets?
6 The foundation of what was laid by a Henn and later adopted a triple cardiac trademark?
7 With what did Mikael refresh himself in the cabin before meeting Figuerola?
8 Which producer invoked the services of a giraffe as a tall quencher?
9 What Eifel product is distinguished by a lion and a star?
10 What is extracted from the Holy Well?
2 Who married Julia in the Savoy Chapel?
3 Who failed to arrest the Beer Baron of Springfield?
4 Who sent Wolfe to address Les Quinze Maitres in West Virginia?
5 What sometime residents of South Dakota are now known as Sue and Stan?
6 What did Cocteau and Danielou borrow from Sophocles for the Russian maestro?
7 What was the initial name of the unique Blue Riband record-breaker?
9 With what did Corning market Schott's discovery?
3 Who died playing polo on the Tiger's 11th birthday?
4 Who suffered terminally through the treachery of Mir Jafar?
5 Whose state of undress was inappropriately ridiculed by Churchill?
6 For whom did Chutney Popcorn illustrate her thespian rather than her epicurean qualities?
7 Which Great Leader's birthday is celebrated on 25th December?
8 Who was betrayed by his friend Man Singh as he slept?
9 Whose End did Jules Verne offer as an alternative?
1 why might Ivanovic now be doubly shy?
2 how has Love-in-a-mist been roughly handled?
3 where was the triumphant Gala boy brought down to earth?
4 where did an urban thief take a grip and enjoy a jubilee meal?
5 for whom did "pills or a powder or something in a bottle" prove inadequate?
6 how did 11th-placed 66 bring a new meaning to Riding for the Disabled?
7 who, having once targeted an abbey, has now settled for the Lodge?
8 whose sad departure has reminded us of a big cat's dentition?
9 why were Opinion Poll and Restraint of Trade excluded?
? Answers will appear in the new year.
? This quiz was amended on 12 February 2014. An earlier version of section 11 question 4 asked which royal infant was his father's 16th and last child, yet still succeeded him as king? That should have been his mother's 16th and last child, yet still succeeded his father as king.
Cuban programmers have unveiled a new 3D video game that puts a distinctly revolutionary twist on gaming, letting players recreate decisive clashes from the 1959 uprising in which many of their grandparents fought.
Fight your way through swamps shoulder-to-shoulder with bearded guerrillas clad in the olive green of Fidel Castro and Ernesto "Che" Guevara. Your mission: topple 1950s Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista. Out to foil you are Batista soldiers and police who pop out from behind trees and fire from trucks and farmhouses. You pick them off with a vintage Colt .45 or Springfield rifle. If you're hit three times, it's revolution over.
"The player identifies with the history of Cuba," said Haylin Corujo, head of video game studies for Cuba's Youth Computing Club and leader of the team of developers who created Gesta Final ? roughly translated as "Final Heroic Deed". "You can be a participant in the battles that were fought in the war from '56 to '59."
The game begins with the user joining the 82 rebels who in 1956 sailed to Cuba from Mexico aboard the Granma.
After a brief description of the landing ? a spectacular disaster that very nearly derailed the rebellion when three-quarters of the Granma's passengers were killed ? you find yourself wading through the wetlands of south-eastern Cuba surrounded by fellow guerrillas identifiable by the black and red armbands of the revolutionary movement.
The keyboard-operated game has five levels, most named after battles like La Plata and El Uvero, and the scenery is full of ancient vehicles and the ferns, canebrakes and mountain trails typical of the Cuban countryside. A soundtrack of gunshots and explosions accompanies the action.
The gamer never reaches the palace to take on Batista, as the main goal is to survive through to level five.which recreates the key second battle of Pino del Agua months before Batista's departure.
The game lets you pick from three player profiles, one in an olive hat similar to the one Fidel Castro was known for, another wearing a Guevara-style beret and the last with the kind of helmet worn by the ill-fated Camilo Cienfuegos in many revolution-era photographs. Programmers said that they're not meant to be exactly like the three famed rebel commanders.
"We didn't want the characters to identify any revolutionary leader, but we did want it to frame the moment," Corujo said.
Michael Bennett, one of the NFL¡¯s most vocal critics of racial injustice, has said police threatened to shoot him last month in Las Vegas for ¡°simply being a black man in the wrong place at the wrong time¡±.
The Seattle Seahawks defensive end says the incident took place as he was heading back to his hotel after attending the Conor McGregor v Floyd Mayweather fight, and heard what sounded like gunshots.
¡°I ran away from the sound, looking for safety,¡± he wrote in a statement posted to Twitter on Wednesday. ¡°Las Vegas police officers singled me out and pointed their guns at me for doing nothing more than simply being a black man in the wrong place at the wrong time.
¡°A police officer ordered me to get on the ground. As I lay on the ground ¡¦ he placed his gun near my head and warned me that if I moved he would ¡®blow my fucking head off¡¯. A second officer came over and forcefully jammed his knee into my back, making it difficult for me to breathe.¡±
TMZ has released video of the incident, and there may be wider repercussions: Bennett says he has retained civil rights attorney John Burris and is exploring ¡°all my legal options¡±.
¡°It is important to note, Mr Bennett was unarmed, sober and not involved in any altercations or dispute at the time the police officers arrested and threatened to use deadly force against him,¡± Burris said in a statement. ¡°The officers¡¯ conduct is particularly outrageous in that there was no basis upon which to select Mr Bennett from a crowd of people all running for their lives. He did nothing wrong.¡±
Bennett said he was terrified during the incident. ¡°I felt helpless as I lay there,¡± he wrote. ¡°All I could think of was ¡®I¡¯m going to die for no other reason than I am black and my skin color is somehow a threat¡¯.¡±
Bennett says he was detained in the back of a police car until he was released when officers recognized him as an NFL player and not ¡°a thug, common criminal or ordinary black man¡±.
The 31-year-old has been vocal in his support of Colin Kaepernick, who has yet to find an NFL team after refusing to stand for the national anthem last season in a protest against racial injustice. Bennett says he intends to do the same: ¡°I sit during the national anthem because equality doesn¡¯t live in this country and no matter how much money you make, what job title you have. When you are seen as a ¡®nigger¡¯ you will be treated that way.¡±
Kaepernick offered his support for Bennett on Wednesday. ¡°This violation that happened against my brother Michael Bennett is disgusting and unjust,¡± Kaepernick wrote on Twitter. ¡°I stand with Michael and I stand with the people.¡±
In response, the Las Vegas police department said on Wednesday that they were responding to reports of a shooter at a casino at the time of Bennett¡¯s arrest. Clark County undersheriff Kevin McMahill said Bennett didn¡¯t stop when officers saw him running away from the casino. McMahill added internal affairs investigators are reviewing video footage to determine exactly what happened.
Bennett is writing a book, titled Things That Make White People Uncomfortable. ¡°I think the title is just a title to start a conversation so people want to read it,¡± Bennett has said. ¡°The book I¡¯m focusing on is issues that I see that are important in America, and they are my views and opinion.¡±
A female shooter died from an apparent self-inflicted gunshot wound on Thursday, after shooting a student at a high school in the west Texas town of Alpine.
The incident caused the lockdown of the school and two other public schools in Alpine, said Brewster County sheriff Ronny Dodson.
Dodson said at an afternoon news conference that a female student at Alpine high school appeared to turn a gun on herself after shooting another female student, who survived. The survivor was treated at the Big Bend regional medical center.
¡°We¡¯re still in shock,¡± Dodson said, adding that the family of the girl who died had moved to the Alpine area about six months ago.
Initial reports suggested there may have been two shooters. At the afternoon conference, Dodson said a federal officer responding to the incident was shot in the leg when another officer¡¯s gun accidentally discharged. The federal officer was transported to a hospital in Odessa.
An initial sheriff¡¯s department inquiry found that a total of five gunshots had been fired at the school.
Alpine high school has 280 students; the town of Alpine, 220 miles south-east of El Paso, has about 6,000 residents.
Dodson said police were also investigating a bomb threat at nearby Sul Ross State University and said he had called in the FBI to aid in that search.
Authorities said a male caller phoned in bomb threats to Sul Ross and a hospital in Alpine. There was also a bomb threat at a motel in Marathon, about 20 miles east of Alpine.
¡°Right now, we have a nut,¡± Dodson said at the afternoon news conference, adding: ¡°Basically, he¡¯s what we¡¯re looking for right now.¡±
According to figures from the pro-gun-reform group Everytown for Gun Safety, the Alpine shooting was the 33rd incident in 2016 in which a gun has been fired on school or college premises across the US.
WARNING: GRAPHIC IMAGES: Surveillance footage from an Ohio Walmart store, where police killed a young black man who was holding an unloaded air rifle and talking on his cellphone, shows he was was shot from the side as he moved to run away from advancing officers.
Malala Yousafzai once wrote: ¡°We realise the importance of our voices only when we are silenced. I was shot on a Tuesday at lunchtime, one bullet, one gunshot heard around the world.¡±
Two years and a day after her attempted assassination by Taliban gunmen, that shot continued to reverberate with the Nobel committee¡¯s announcement that the 17-year-old Pakistani schoolgirl is to share the peace prize, its youngest recipient ever.
When the news broke, Malala was in a chemistry class at Edgbaston high school for girls, Birmingham, far away from the mountain-fringed city of Mingora in the picturesque Swat valley where she was born, and where she began her outspoken campaign for the right to education, and where she almost died on 9 October 2012.
Malala ? a name now instantly recognisable worldwide ? shares the 8m kronor (¡Ì690,000) prize with Kailash Satyarthi, 60, an Indian child rights campaigner, as both are lauded for their ¡°struggle against the suppression of children and young people¡±.
Malala¡¯s campaign, noted the Nobel committee, has been carried out ¡°under the most dangerous circumstances¡±, and it places her alongside previous recipients Nelson Mandela, Martin Luther King and Aung San Suu Kyi.
She waited until school had finished before giving her reaction, saying a teacher had told her the news in chemistry, and she had celebrated by going on to a physics class, and then English.
The award, she said, ¡°is for all those children who are voiceless and whose voices need to be heard¡±.
She saw it as motivation to continue her campaign for equal rights to education. ¡°I felt more powerful and more courageous because this award is not just a piece of metal or a medal you wear or an award you keep in your room. This is encouragement for me to go forward.¡±
On the day she was shot in Pakistan she was in the middle of her school exams, ¡°squashed between friends and teachers on the benches of the open-back truck used as a school bus¡±.
The school, Khushal public school, was founded by her father, Ziauddin Yousafzai, who, according to a profile in Vanity Fair, ¡°encouraged Malala to speak freely and learn everything she could¡±. By then, though only 15, she was an outspoken critic of the tactics of the Taliban, who overran the city in 2009, in denying education to girls.
Since the age of 11 she had been championing girls¡¯ education in Pakistan, speaking out in TV interviews and the subject of a documentary in 2009. Under the auspices of her father, also outspoken on education, she wrote a diary about life under Taliban rule which ran on BBC Urdu between January and March 2009.
Using the pseudonym Gul Makai, the name of a heroine from a Pashtun folk tale, she passionately expressed her desire to remain in education and documented her fear and those of her friends of being targeted by militants, and how they attended school in plain clothes rather than their uniforms to escape attention. In 2011 she was nominated for the international children¡¯s peace prize by the KidsRights Foundation.
She was one of the ¡°clever girls¡±, dreaming of becoming a doctor, decorating her hands with henna for holidays and weddings not with flowers or butterflies, but with calculus and chemical formulae. Then, on 9 October 2012, a masked Taliban gunman boarded her school vehicle, asked for her by name, pointed a Colt .45 at her and shot at point-blank range. A bullet grazed her brain, travelling from above the back of her left eye, down the side of her jaw and into her neck.
A couple more inches, doctors said, and her injuries would have been fatal. Two classmates were also shot, and survived. Last month 10 Taliban fighters who tried to kill her were arrested, the Pakistan army said.
Initially treated by neurosurgeons at a Pakistani military hospital, Malala was flown to Britain for treatment at Queen Elizabeth hospital in Birmingham, the city that has adopted her and her family, and where she has had several more operations.
She has been dismissive of the physical scars, telling her mother: ¡°It doesn¡¯t matter if I can¡¯t smile or blink properly. I¡¯m still me, Malala. The important thing is God has given me my life.¡±
If Malala had been an outspoken advocate for equal education before the attack, she became an international force after it.
She has continued to campaign, meeting Barack Obama, being named one of Time magazine¡¯s 100 most influential people and last year publishing the memoir I am Malala.
Addressing the UN on her 16th birthday, she said: ¡°One child, one teacher, one book, one pen can change the world.¡± Her awards include the European parliament¡¯s Sakharov prize for freedom of thought and last year the UN made 12 July ? her birthday ? Malala Day, celebrating the campaign for a child¡¯s right to receive an education.
On Friday Obama, himself a peace prize laureate, said he was awestruck by Malala¡¯s courage as he hailed her Nobel win. The US president said: ¡°Michelle and I were proud to welcome this remarkable young woman to the Oval Office last year. We were awe-struck by her courage and filled with hope knowing this is only the beginning of her extraordinary efforts to make the world a better place.¡±
Former prime minister Gordon Brown, who has campaigned with Malala on education issues since leaving office, said of the Nobel honour: ¡°Malala Yousafzai and Kailash Satyarthi are the world¡¯s greatest children¡¯s champions.¡±
And Canada¡¯s prime minister, Stephen Harper, announced that Malala will be awarded honorary Canadian citizenship when she travels to Ottawa on 22 October.
But reaction in Pakistan was mixed. Prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, said she was the ¡°pride¡± of the country. ¡°Her achievement is unparallelled and unequalled. Girls and boys of the world should take the lead from her struggle and commitment¡±.
Ahmed Shah, a friend of Malala¡¯s family, said: ¡°This is a great prize and big news for us. This minor but courageous girl has created a positive identity of Pakistan. We as Pakistanis and especially as residents of the Swat valley are thankful to Malala.¡±
But she has often been accused by some in her home region of being a British or American agent, or, worse, viewed as a deserving Taliban target. Liaquat Baloch, a leader of Jamaat-e-Islami, a rightwing religious-political party, said: ¡°Malala is a Pakistani student and she is getting a lot of support and patronage abroad.
¡° On the surface this is not a bad thing and we welcome this, and there is no objection to the award, but the attack on Malala and then her support in the West creates a lot of suspicions.¡± In the past Malala has expressed her hope that she is not thought of ¡°as the girl who was shot by the Taliban but the girl who fought for education¡±.
She has now abandoned her ambition to become a doctor, instead deciding to become ¡°a politician, a good politician¡±. With what she has achieved, aged just 17, few would bet against her achieving her dream.
I actually went on a placement to work at the John H Stroger Jr hospital in Cook County in Chicago for eight weeks, the hospital ER is based on. I spent four weeks working in trauma and it is very hard work - I think that is reflected in ER. The hospital is on Chicago's south side and is a free hospital serving a lower socio-economic community. We got a lot of gunshot wounds, stabbings and assaults. I would say there were about five gunshot patients a night - I saw one guy who had been shot 13 times.
I don't think the TV show is always accurate. They always seem to be resuscitating someone, probably because it looks exciting. But in reality, from my experience, you don't resuscitate that many people and if you need to resuscitate someone, you are generally past saving them and the outcome isn't very good. I am considering becoming a trauma surgeon. I don't know if I have been influenced by watching ER, though maybe I have on a subconscious level. I don't necessarily think ER glamorises emergency medicine, but I think some doctors are attracted by a "hero factor".
I started medical school in 1995 around the time that John Carter started as an intern, so I felt like I was growing up with him. It is very accurate and we'd use it as easy revision.
It is like all the best, most exciting cases you see in a month condensed into one episode. In real life, you might get two hours of a critically ill or trauma patient, then the rest of your shift you'll have kids with coughs coming in and people with sprained ankles. You couldn't be flat out all the time, like on ER.
We have a helicopter team, and if we get a multiple trauma in, I suppose it does look like it does on ER. I'm the leader, so I will do lots of shouting and everyone will do their jobs and it should flow. Some of their procedures aren't that realistic - they'll put someone on a ventilator and it's done in five seconds. In real life, it can take up to 20 minute. But otherwise I'd struggle to criticise it.
The drama and emotion is hyped, but in any emergency department I bet you will find one of the doctors going out with another doctor or a nurse. I met my other half when we were working together - he's in emergency medicine too. Our private lives are rarely as exciting as on ER though. We probably know someone like a Dr Romano or a Doug Ross, though I can't say anyone looks like George Clooney. My generation of doctors came of age with ER - so I think that's why it's so special to me.
When I watched ER as a medical student I liked trying to diagnose people and picking up errors the staff made. All my medical student friends would watch it too, and we'd pass it off as revision. On ER there always seemed to be a junior doctor who botches an operation or misses a fatal condition. That is something every junior doctor dreads and it does happen, but fortunately not very often.
ER does make working in a hospital look much more glamorous than it is in reality. Interesting things do happen, but not things like suspected smallpox outbreaks and helicopters crashing.
While lying on his back in the street with his arms in the air, Charles Kinsey told police that he was a behavioral therapist caring for the autistic patient who sat next to him. Despite this, Kinsey left the scene with a gunshot wound to the leg.
Footage released late on Wednesday by Kinsey¡¯s lawyer, shows Kinsey, an unarmed black man, on his back while his patient plays with a toy truck in the moments before an officer opened fire, wounding Kinsey in the leg. The shooting was yet another incident which exposed the fault lines between police and communities of color in the US.
That tension, which was brought to the fore after Missouri police fatally shot the unarmed, black 18-year-old Michael Brown in August 2014, has again been exacerbated by the high-profile police killings of black men earlier this month and the fatal shootings of police officers in Dallas and Baton Rouge that followed.
Monday¡¯s shooting in north Miami inspired outrage three days later with the release of the cellphone video footage, which does not show the moment when the officer fired three shots towards Kinsey and his patient. The name of the patient has not been released and it is unclear why the two men were in the street.
Kinsey can be heard on the video telling police that the only thing the patient has in his hands is the toy. ¡°A toy truck,¡± Kinsey tells the officers. ¡°I am a behavior therapist at the group home. That¡¯s all it is.¡±
A few seconds later, the camera swerves to show an officer hiding behind a pole with his gun raised, but footage of the actual shooting has not been released. The video also shows both men on the ground surrounded by officers.
Thomas Matthews, 73, is the longtime caretaker of a convenience store and shopping plaza a block away from the shooting. He had been walking with a friend on North-east 14th Avenueon Monday when a police car sped by him and stopped just a few feet away.
An officer got out, drew her gun, and hid behind a building. Another officer got out of a second car and took an assault rifle out of his trunk and got behind a building on the opposite corner.
Matthews could see Kinsey lying on the street with his hands up, with the man he cared for sitting next to him. Matthews¡¯ friend had a pair of binoculars with him, which Matthews used to zoom in on the scene.
¡°I brought the kid right up to me with those binoculars, and I could see he had a toy truck. I said to the cop, ¡®He has a toy. Don¡¯t shoot him.¡¯ The cop turned to me and said, ¡®Get back. I¡¯m not going to tell you again to get back again.¡±
He said the officer with the assault rifle shot at Kinsey three times, hitting him once in the upper leg, near his groin. Kinsey started yelling ¡°Help! Help! They shot me,¡± still lying on the ground with his hands up.
¡°I¡¯ve been on this corner for some years, and I¡¯ve never seen anything like that in my life where they come up to a man and do him like that,¡± Matthews said. ¡°I understand when an officer fears for his life and he needs to shoot someone. But you got to wait to see if he has a weapon. All he had was a toy truck. Officers are supposed to be trained to know the difference between a toy and a gun.¡±
North Miami police said they responded to the scene on Monday after receiving a 911 call about an armed man threatening to shoot himself.
Department spokeswoman Natalie Buissereth said in a statement that ¡°arriving officers attempted to negotiate with the two men on the scene, one of whom was later identified as suffering from autism ¡¦ At some point during the on-scene negotiation, one of the responding officers discharged his weapon¡±.
The officer who fired the weapon has not been named and has been placed on administrative leave in keeping with standard protocol.
The Miami-Dade state attorney¡¯s office has opened an investigation into the shooting in conjunction with the Florida department of law enforcement.
Neither Kinsey nor the patient were found to have a weapon.
Kinsey¡¯s lawyer, Hilton Napoleon, released the video on Wednesday night and said he was negotiating a possible settlement with the city.
¡°They realize this was something inappropriate regarding the shooting,¡± Napoleon told the Miami Herald. He said that if police departments admitted their fault in incidents like this more often, ¡°it would probably go a long way¡± toward improving relations with the public.
Kinsey, who was not seriously wounded and was expected to go home on Thursday, told local news station WSVN that he asked the officer why he shot at him. Kinsey said: ¡°His words were, ¡®I don¡¯t know.¡¯¡±
¡°I was really more worried about him [the patient] more than myself because ¡¦ once I¡¯ve got my hands up they¡¯re not going to shoot me, this is what I¡¯m thinking, they¡¯re not going to shoot me,¡± Kinsey said. ¡°Wow, was I wrong.¡±
Clint Bower, who runs the group home where Kinsey has worked for more than a year, told Local 10 News that the man Kinsey was caring for is nonverbal and has ¡°relatively low function¡±.
There was a bouquet of roses left for Kinsey on the stoop outside the group home where he works.
The incident has further outraged a country torn by a rash of violence between police and the public. Eight police officers were killed in July in Dallas and Baton Rouge after the police shootings of two black men were captured on camera earlier this month.
On Thursday, the Austin American-Statesman published footage from a police dashboard camera showing a Texas officer violently arresting a black woman during a traffic stop in 2015, throwing her to the ground. A second video from after the arrest shows an officer suggesting to the woman that white people are afraid of black people because of ¡°violent tendencies¡±. Both officers have been taken off active duty.
Just over a week before three officers were killed in Baton Rouge on Sunday, Barack Obama responded to questions about police and race in a town hall meeting. The president offered support to protesters and police, trying to be conciliatory while facing questions from law enforcement and the relatives of those who had been killed by police officers.
¡°What is true for a lot of African American men is there¡¯s a greater presumption of dangerousness that arises from the social and cultural perceptions that have been fed to folks for a long time,¡± Obama said. ¡°But black folks and Latino folks also carry some assumptions. You may see a police officer who¡¯s doing everything right, and you already assumed the worst rather than the best in him, and we have to guard against that as well.¡±
Jenn Park-Mustacchio?is a licensed funeral director and embalmer who works in New Jersey, USA. She studied anthropology and human biology at the University of Pennsylvania, and has been in the funeral industry for 14 years. So what would you like to know? Leave your questions in the comments.?Jenn will pop in throughout the day to answer them.
Take us through a regular day at work:
Typically, my day begins when someone dies. Since I'm a trade embalmer, I don't handle the first call or transport of a deceased person (although I've previously done both). My boss calls me, and I arrive at the funeral home shortly after the deceased has been taken into our care to begin the embalming process. I suit up in personal protective equipment (a gown, apron, shoe covers, gloves etc) and evaluate the person to decide how I will proceed. Every case is different and requires a special combination of fluids (which are mixed according to the height, weight and physical conditions of the deceased). I mix the fluids accordingly and begin to set the features.
Setting the features involves closing the eyes and mouth and placing cotton in the mouth to give the person a more natural expression. Next, I gently flex the arms, legs and fingers to relieve the muscle tension or stiffness of rigor mortis. I position the hands one over the other, wash the body, cover the genitals (to preserve modesty) and prepare the tools I will need to embalm.
Typically, we use a scalpel to make a small incision near the right collarbone. From there, we search for the common carotid artery and internal jugular vein. A small incision is made in each. Arterial tubes are placed in the artery (one is directed towards the heart, while the other is directed towards the head). A drain tube, or angled forceps, is also placed in the vein to facilitate drainage of blood. The hose, connected to the embalming machine, is then connected to the arterial tube directed towards the heart. The embalming machine is then adjusted to regulate pressure (the force of the fluid) and rate of flow (speed of the fluid). These knobs are adjusted differently during embalming for each case to create the optimum rate of injection for the body. The machine is switched on and the fluid begins to move through the hose, through the arterial tube and into the body. As the embalming fluid is pushed through the arterial system, the blood is forced out through the jugular vein.
The body is vigorously massaged with a soapy sponge to help facilitate drainage and distribution of embalming fluid. The tissue will begin to firm and take on a rosy appearance, which is an excellent indication of adequate distribution and a successful embalming. The tubes are then removed, the vein and artery tied off and the incision is sutured. Next, the cavity is treated. Fluid is suctioned from the hollow organs with an instrument called a trocar, then a high-index (very strong) fluid is placed into the cavity and the incision is closed with a small circular plastic button like device referred to as a trocar button. The deceased is again washed. Their hair is combed and cream is placed on their face to prevent skin dehydration. The deceased is then covered and will remain in the preparation room until they are dressed, cosmetized and ready to be placed into a casket for viewing.
Typically the viewing takes place a few days after death. So I will clean up the prep room and leave until it's time for the next embalming or until its time to dress and casket someone who's been previously embalmed.
*The above is a description of a "typical" embalming. If a person dies tragically (murder, suicide, automobile accident) the embalming process is drastically different.
Tell us about something surprising, or unexpected, that happened to you while working:
I've had several interesting things happen on the job, but one particular moment comes to mind. I went in for a 3am embalming and heard a strange whisper. I quickly fumbled for the lights and, upon turning them on, figured out that the noise was coming from the occupied stretcher. I approached with caution expecting the person inside could be alive. However, upon unzipping the cover, I found a tape recorder (that I later found out was playing a Buddhist chant). The next day the family explained that, ideally, a monk would be at the place of death to chant when the soul exits the body. Chanting calms the soul, which the buddhists believe, is in a state of confusion and fright after exiting the body. The soul of the deceased must be put at ease with food and chant throughout the difficult time of transition. This particular experience was both enlightening and frightening!
What makes for a really good day at work?
My job is fulfilling when a particularly difficult case comes out better than expected. If a family decides to keep a casket open, when they previously thought they wouldn't be able to, or when someone compliments my work. The best compliment I got was from a woman whose daughter died of bone cancer. She took my hand and said, "Thank you, she's so beautiful, she looks like she could get up and dance."
What is your salary? Do you get benefits?
The median annual income for funeral directors in the US is over $52,000 (with the annual salary in New Jersey averaging above $79,000). Regulations vary state by state, but here in New Jersey we are embalmers/funeral directors and are licensed to handle all aspects of the funeral (from first call to final disposition). In other states they have separate licenses for funeral directors and embalmers.
Even though I am licensed to perform all aspects of the business, I work as an embalmer because I enjoy that particular aspect of the business and found that it allows me to spend a significant amount of time with my family. Trade embalmers, like myself, are paid by the job. Usually we work for more than one location and will embalm, dress, casket, cosmetize and do restorative work. Trade embalmers have the potential to make significantly more than the average funeral director depending on how many locations they work for and how busy those locations are. However, we do not receive health benefits because we are not full-time employees.
Have you ever made a mistake at work?
I'm fortunate enough to say that I have not made any major mistakes. When I was an intern, I was super careful and very aware that any mistake I made could potentially affect the grieving process of the deceased friends and loved ones, so I always consulted with senior funeral directors if I was unsure of what to do or how to proceed with difficult cases.
Highlights (so far) from the Q&A
The man killed by police on the M62 motorway died from gunshot wounds to the chest, the police watchdog has said, as it appealed for witnesses to come forward.
The Independent Police Complaints Commission revealed the results of the postmortem examination carried out on Yassar Yaqub on Thursday. It said there was no CCTV footage of the shooting and that the officers involved were not wearing body cameras.
Yaqub, 28, was shot through his windscreen after unmarked police cars boxed in his white Audi on a slip road off the M62 in Huddersfield on Monday night.
West Yorkshire police said the operation was planned and followed a tip-off about a suspected illegal firearm. Investigators found a gun in Yaqub¡¯s car after the incident.
Derrick Campbell, the IPCC commissioner investigating the shooting, acknowledged there were ¡°many unanswered questions¡±. On Wednesday, Yaqub¡¯s father, Mohammed, said he wanted to know whether armed officers had planned to ¡°assassinate¡± his son.
Campbell said: ¡°I would like to reassure the local and wider community that this will be a thorough and detailed independent investigation. We will be carefully examining all the circumstances leading up to Mr Yaqub¡¯s death, including the planning of the police operation and the actions of the officers involved that evening.
¡°I am, of course, aware there are many unanswered questions but I would urge patience at this time and that people allow our investigation to run its course. If anyone witnessed events who has not yet come forward, we would be grateful to hear from them. We are making steady, positive progress, and are continuing to build a picture of what exactly happened. We are in contact with Mr Yaqub¡¯s family and will be keeping them updated.¡±
IPCC investigators have conducted house-to-house inquiries and are carrying out ballistics and forensics testing on the gun found in Yaqub¡¯s car.
Yaqub¡¯s Audi and a white VW Golf that was stopped by police in the same operation are undergoing forensics tests, as is an unmarked police vehicle.
On Thursday night, West Yorkshire police said a 30-year-old Dewsbury man had been charged with firearms offences in relation to the incident. Moshin Amin will appear at Leeds magistrates court on Friday charged with possession of a firearm ? a semi-automatic handgun ? with intent to cause fear of violence, possession of a sound moderator and possession of ammunition.
Two other men, aged 37 and 26, who were arrested in connection with the incident have been released on police bail pending inquiries.
On Wednesday night a roadside vigil was held for Yaqub at the spot where he was shot in Ainley Top, north of Huddersfield.
Yaqub was acquitted of attempted murder in 2010 when the case against him fell apart in court. Two years ago he was treated for shotgun wounds after a gunman targeted him outside his family home. Neighbours and former associates said he was involved with drugs, and after his death his friends described him as ¡°no angel¡±.
In an interview with the Guardian, his father said he had ¡°run out of tears¡± since the shooting. ¡°I want answers from the police, from all the relevant bodies that can give me answers ¡¦ the truth will be revealed.¡±
He took exception to West Yorkshire police¡¯s description of the operation as ¡°pre-planned¡± and demanded to know: ¡°How can it be pre-planned? Pre-planned means that they have intentions of doing that. Pre-planned means that you¡¯ve got intentions to assassinate someone and murder someone. That¡¯s what you mean by pre-planned. Was that the case in this case? If it was pre-planned, pre-planned for what?¡±
West Yorkshire police have declined to comment and referred inquiries to the IPCC.
Artist Pyotr Pavlensky has made eyes water all over the world with his protest against Russia's descent into authoritarianism ? nailing his testicles to the ground in Red Square on Sunday to denounce Vladimir Putin's "police state". Yet connoisseurs of performance art are probably already saying: "Meh, seen it all before." For Pavlensky's protest is the latest in a long line of performance art pieces that have endangered life and limb. Here are our top 10 ...
No one will ever know if Bas Jan Ader expected to die in his performance In Search of the Miraculous. In 1975, the Dutchman set out from Cape Cod in a small sailing boat to cross the Atlantic. This was part of an artwork that also included a series of pictures of bland Los Angeles scenes. It was as if he sailed out to find something deeper than freeways and fast food. His broken boat was found 150 miles off the coast of Ireland. It was empty.
Today she hangs out with Lady Gaga but in 1974 the Belgrade-born, New York-based artist Marina Abramovic nearly joined Bas Jan Ader as a martyr to the imagination. In Rhythm 5, she placed on the ground a large, five-pointed wooden star, an echo of the communist red star, soaked it in petrol and lit it. As it blazed, she threw in bits of toenail, fingernail and hair, which she cut off in front of a watching audience. Then she jumped through the flames into the centre. She did not know the fire had sucked up all the oxygen and, since the audience couldn't see her clearly for smoke, it took several moments for them to realise she was unconscious. Abramovic was rescued just in time and rushed to hospital.
In 1971, young American artist Chris Burden stood still while a friend aimed a rifle and shot him in the arm. The performance was caught on video. It was a violent time, with war in Vietnam and riots in US cities. Burden wore a T-shirt and jeans and, after being shot, clutched his arm, looking stunned even though he planned it all. He recovered and went on to have himself nailed to a?Volkswagen.
In his 1972 performance Seedbed, American artist Vito Acconci constructed a false floor in a New York art gallery and hid beneath it. Speakers relayed his voice into the gallery. As visitors walked over the wooden floor, they heard him murmuring sexual fantasies about them while masturbating, thereby evoking the paranoia of the Nixon era.
In attacking his own genitals, Pyotr Pavlensky may have been inspired by inaccurate stories about Austrian artist Rudolf Schwarzkogler. When he died in 1969, it was widely believed he had killed himself by cutting off his own penis. The works of this Vienna actionist do include images of castration, but they were mocked up. So Schwarzkogler's reputation as the ultimate performance artist is somewhat exaggerated. He actually died after falling from a window.
In The Reincarnation of Saint Orlan, a project that started in 1990, the French artist Orlan has altered herself with a series of operations. Through plastic surgery, she aims to have a completely new appearance based on bits of western paintings that define the ideal of beauty, including Botticelli's Venus and the Mona Lisa. She calls the project "a?struggle against the innate".
In retrospect, Orlan's operations look less like feminist body art than the beginning of a cultural obsession with cyborgs and post-human transformations. Enter the Catalan-based Neil Harbisson, who, having been born unable to see colours, has been implanted with a device to "hear" them. In 2004, this "eyeborg" extension was allowed to feature on his passport photo, a milestone in cyborg rights. He is the founder of the Cyborg?Foundation.
In Cut Piece, an early piece of feminist art first staged in 1964, Yoko Ono knelt on the ground and laid down a pair of scissors. The audience were invited to come forward and cut off any piece of her clothing. It started politely but became more and more threatening as her clothes were reduced to rags and she kneeled in her?underwear.
Hermann Nitsch was part of the Vienna actionist movement that set out to shock Austria with gory images of violence, blood and apparent self-torture. His grotesque Wagnerian Gesamtkunstwerk is, however, the Orgiastic Mysteries Theatre, in which crowds of young people bathe in blood and conduct animal sacrifice at rituals in his castle. The last such rite happened in 1998.
In 2012, Japanese artist Mao Sugiyama had his genitals surgically removed, to raise awareness of asexual rights. After keeping them in the fridge for a while, he cooked them and served his friends a meal of steaming hot bollocks. But was it art? Hard to say without actually tasting them.
The most famous gun in French literature, the revolver with which the poet Paul Verlaine tried to kill his lover, Arthur Rimbaud, is going under the hammer, Christie¡¯s has said.
Verlaine bought the 7mm six-shooter in Brussels on the morning of 10 July 1873, determined to put an end to a torrid two-year affair with his teenage lover.
The 29-year-old poet had abandoned his young wife and child to be with Rimbaud, who would later become a symbol of rebellious youth.
However, after an opium- and absinthe-soaked stay in London that would inspire Rimbaud¡¯s Une Saison en Enfer (A Season in Hell), Verlaine wanted to go back to his wife. He fled to the Belgian capital to get away from Rimbaud, only for the younger man to follow him.
It was in a hotel room there at two in the afternoon where, after the lovers had rowed, cried and got drunk ? according to Rimbaud ? that the suicidal Verlaine raised the pistol.
¡°Here¡¯s how I will teach you how to leave!¡± he shouted, before firing twice at Rimbaud. One bullet hit him in the wrist, while the other bullet struck the wall and ricocheted into the chimney.
But, having been bandaged up in hospital, Rimbaud again begged the author of Poemes saturniens not to leave him. Verlaine, who was to be dogged by drink and drug addiction all his life, pulled out the revolver again and threatened him with it in the street.
Verlaine was arrested by a passing policeman and sentenced to two years in jail with hard labour, where ? much to Rimbaud¡¯s fury ? he converted to Catholicism.
In prison, he wrote 32 poems that would later appear in some of his best-known collections: Sagesse, Jadis et Naguere and Invectives.
Rimbaud, whose legacy helped inspire the 60s counter-culture movement and rock rebels such as Jim Morrison of the Doors, moved back in with his domineering mother and finished Une Saison en Enfer.
The gun was confiscated and later fell into the hands of a private owner, Christie¡¯s said. It estimates the gun could make up to ¢æ60,000 (¡Ì54,000) at an auction in Paris on 30 November.
The end of December marked the 100th anniversary of the death of Rasputin, the ¡°mad monk of Russia¡±, or ¡°lover of the Russian queen¡± if you believe the Boney M song, though you probably shouldn¡¯t. While the song is undoubtedly a floor-filler, unsurprisingly it is not exactly a reliable historical account of Rasputin¡¯s life.
Grigori Yefimovich Rasputin, a mystic and spiritual healer born in Pokrovskoe in Siberia, wielded huge influence over the Russian royal family, particularly Alexandra, the Tsarina, who looked to the spiritual healer to cure her haemophiliac son, Alexei. The life of Rasputin was certainly pretty strange but it is the stories surrounding his death that are the strangest of all.
What is known is that one evening Rasputin went to the Yusupov Palace in St Petersburg at the invitation of Prince Felix Yusupov. Rasputin¡¯s dead body was recovered from the frozen Neva River days later. No one is completely sure what happened in between these two events.
The most well-known account of the events comes from Prince Yusupov himself in his memoirs Lost Splendour. This autobiography reads more like a boy¡¯s own adventure story than a reliable historical document and many doubt the authenticity of what he wrote. According to Yusupov, when Rasputin arrived at the palace he was taken down to the cellar where he was given cake and madeira wine. Upstairs, a gramophone played Yankee Doodle Dandy to fool the monk in to believing there was a party in full swing.
Yusupov and his accomplices had planned things carefully. The cakes offered to Rasputin had been laced with enough potassium cyanide to slay a monastery full of monks. But Rasputin just kept eating them. Incredulous at the monk¡¯s survival, Prince Yusupov poured madeira into a cyanide-laced wine glass and handed it to Rasputin. Instead of collapsing into unconsciousness within seconds, as would be expected from a massive dose of cyanide, Rasputin continued to sip the wine like a connoisseur. A second lethal glass disappeared into the monk¡¯s mouth with little apparent effect other than some difficulty swallowing. Asked if he was feeling unwell he replied ¡°Yes, my head is heavy and I¡¯ve a burning sensation in my stomach.¡± A third glass of tainted wine only seemed to revive him. Having ingested their whole stock of cyanide, the group of assassins were somewhat at a loss as to what to do next.
So they shot him.
The bullet appeared to have entered the body near the heart ? certain death, or so they thought. But, soon after, Rasputin¡¯s eyes opened and, clearly upset at the turn of events, he attacked Yusupov. There was a ferocious struggle before the prince could free himself and run away up the stairs. Rasputin followed.
The group finally emerged into a courtyard, where four more shots were fired into Rasputin¡¯s body before he slumped to the ground. To make sure they wouldn¡¯t be troubled again, the assassins wrapped and tied the body with a piece of heavy linen, bundled it into a car and drove to Petrovski Island, where it was dropped from a bridge into the frozen river below.
The whole account sounds fanciful from start to finish, but remarkable things do happen. Human beings have achieved incredible physical feats in spite of horrible injuries. During a duel in the sixteenth century one man received a stab wound directly to the heart but still managed to run 230 yards to chase down his opponent before collapsing. Maybe Rasputin really was still alive after the first shot and capable of a fight. But what about the poison? Surely no one could eat so much cyanide with so little effect?
The theories as to why the cyanide didn¡¯t kill Rasputin are almost as numerous as the theories of how he really died. What is surprising is that the theories are scientifically credible.
The first theory is that the poisoners were simply rubbish at their job. Either they didn¡¯t use enough, or the cyanide they had was old stock that had decayed into something far less toxic. Though plausible, a century after the events it is impossible to tell if this is true.
The second theory is that Rasputin, aware that someone might be trying to kill him (he had survived at least one assassination attempt already), had decided to protect himself against poison. Perhaps he was inspired by Mithridates, king of Pontus in the first century BC, who, fearful of poisoners, concocted an antidote or preventative. By ingesting sub-lethal amounts of every known poison he developed an immunity. When Mithridates was under threat from the local populace he tried to kill himself with poison, but the attempt failed and he had to request that a guard kill him with a sword.
It is true that the body can develop a natural immunity or tolerance to some very toxic substances by administering very small doses over a period of time (this is definitely not a recommendation for DIY poison prevention). Some of these toxic compounds include snake venom, ricin and opiates, to name but a few. Unfortunately, cyanide isn¡¯t one of those substances. You simply cannot build up a natural tolerance to cyanide by using this method.
The third theory is that Rasputin had alcoholic gastritis, which can lead to having less stomach acid. Without acid in the stomach, the potassium cyanide can¡¯t be converted into hydrogen cyanide, and is therefore considerably less toxic. It¡¯s another plausible explanation, but no one really knows if Rasputin suffered from this complaint or not.
The fourth theory is that his poisoners unintentionally gave him the antidote along with the poison. Studies have shown that rats fed sugar with cyanide fare a lot better than those fed cyanide without it. The theory, though not proven, is that the sugar binds to the cyanide in a way that allows its excretion before it can be fully absorbed into the body. The assassins therefore may have chosen poorly when they elected to deliver the cyanide in sugary cakes and wine.
The final theory is that Yusupov made the whole thing up, and Rasputin was simply shot shortly after he arrived at the palace by a person or persons unknown. This is probably much nearer the truth ? but it isn¡¯t nearly as interesting as stories of an ¡°unkillable¡± monk.
Detectives are making a renewed effort to solve the murder of a man whose burnt body was discovered in a reservoir above a West Yorkshire town almost 30 years ago.
Laurence Winstanley, a 23-year-old car mechanic and part-time car dealer, was killed with a gunshot to the head before his mutilated body was trussed up and dumped in a reservoir in the moorland above Huddersfield.
Police divers were spotted searching a pond off Blackstone Edge Road in Littleborough, Greater Manchester, at Christmas.
Winstanley, who had moved with his family from Ogden, Rochdale, to Shaw in Oldham, was reported missing in 1988. A year later ? in September 1989 ? his mutilated and scorched body was found at Baitings Dam between Littleborough and Ripponden after a summer drought had left the water levels lower than normal.
He had been wrapped in a curtain and weighed down with a pick-axe head. At the time detectives said they believed it was a gangland ¡°execution¡±.
West Yorkshire police confirmed the most recent search was in connection with the murder investigation. A spokesman said: ¡°Inquiries remain ongoing. West Yorkshire police has made a key commitment that a case is never closed until it is resolved. This is to give, where possible, victims and their families closure. As part of this commitment to victims we continuously review our undetected homicides and serious sexual offences.¡±
In 2009, on the 20th anniversary of the discovery of the body, police put up a ¡Ì10,000 reward to help bring the killer to justice.
At the time Winstanley¡¯s mother, Vanessa, said her life had been ¡°ripped apart¡±. She begged the public for information to help detectives find her son¡¯s killer.
She said: ¡°Laurence was a wonderful son. The whole family have lost their normal lives. We only function in the hope that this will come to a close, that the perpetrators will be brought to justice and that Laurence will finally be laid to peace. He was given no chance to have a normal life ? to get married, to have children and to grow old.
¡°The people responsible for this horrific crime must be found and punished, somebody must know them, and we urge you the public to have the strength to come forward and speak out.¡±
Eight years ago, the Winstanley family put up a ¡Ì25,000 reward for information about the killing. It prompted several new lines of inquiry, but left police no nearer to catching the killer.
At the time of his disappearance Winstanley lived in the Sholver area of Oldham.
On the day he went missing, he had been drinking at his local pub, The Windsor, when he received a telephone call that seemed to concern him. He went to his mother¡¯s house, but took more than an hour to complete the journey, which would normally take minutes.
Officers want to know where Winstanley went that afternoon before calling to see his mother.
He was seen at the pub later that evening, but no one can be sure what time he left. He was never seen alive again.
A couple of days after his disappearance, his red Ford Cortina estate, registration number SAT 385W, was taken to a scrap merchants in the Oldham area.
His mutilated body was discovered almost a year later on 26 September 1989 in the reservoir, just off the A58 on the outskirts of Ripponden.
The case featured on Crimewatch in 1989 and more than 80 officers swooped on homes in Rochdale and Littleborough in January 1990.
A man was questioned after the raids, but Winstanley¡¯s murderer has never been found.
Anyone with information can call West Yorkshire police on 101 or ring Crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555 111.
Under proposals before parliament, councils are to be given new powers to cut down hedges that cause a nuisance. This follows a string of violent clashes in Britain's gardens caused by what has become known as 'hedge rage'.
A staggering 100,000 hedge disputes are currently thought to exist across Britain, blighting people's lives and forcing the government to take action. The new rules stop short of setting a maximum height for hedges but help to settle arguments over problem hedges where currently no clear guidelines exist.
Changes in the law will come too late, though, for Mr Wilson from Lincolnshire, who last month died from gunshot wounds in hospital. Police are questioning his neighbour, Mr Dickenson, after a reported argument between the two men over a privet hedge. The trouble started two years ago when Mr Wilson cut back the hedge without his neighbour's permission.
A month earlier Douglas Reid, also from Lincolnshire, died from a heart attack thought to be brought on by a blazing argument over a boundary hedge. The problem started when Mr Reid cut back some bushes as a favour for a friend and the neighbour objected.
Tensions often arise because homeowners are left powerless to control their neighbour's preference for massive 40 foot leylandii hedges, which block light and drain the surrounding soil of moisture rendering adjoining gardens unfit for growing plants.
But taking the law into your own hands can cost you dear as Paul Brough from Northumberland discovered in 2001. He trimmed his neighbour's massive leylandii without permission only to be sued for trespass. He was fined ¡Ì500 and ordered to pay ¡Ì2,500 costs.
Present laws allow you to grow any hedge you like on your own land. And there is no height limit even if the hedge is the visual barrier between two properties. Owners of the hedge can reduce its height, encourage its growth or cut it into interesting shapes and the neighbour is powerless.
You are allowed to cut the branches off your neighbour's hedge, but only up to the boundary. When so doing, however, you must not do anything that will damage the hedge. Before trimming overhanging branches you should notify your neighbour.
Strictly speaking once the branches have been cut off they belong to your neighbour. In theory therefore you should offer them to your neighbour or place them on your neighbour's side of the boundary.
You may not pick fruit from a branch overhanging your garden without your neighbour's permission, because it belongs to him or her, and so does any fruit which falls on to your land from your neighbour's tree.
If a hedge merely obstructs your light and its branches do not overhang your property, you probably cannot force your neighbour to do anything about it unless there is a prescriptive right to light - that is one acquired through uninterrupted use over 20 years.
Where the boundary is a hedge, it is assumed that, unless there is evidence to the contrary, the boundary line runs through the centre of the hedge. Problems may then arise concerning the clipping and control of the growth of the hedge.
But if the hedge is the boundary, the property owners are jointly responsible for it, which means that neither can do anything to it which would reduce it in size or injure it, without the agreement of the other.
If one side wants to let more sun into the garden, say, and would like to reduce the height of the hedge, the adjoining owner may not agree. And there lies the problem, since without agreement there is no apparent solution.
Hedgeline, a campaign group set up by Michael Jones, a retired teacher who was himself involved in a leylandii dispute, has published a seven-point code of practice to help people to resolve hedge disputes, covering problems with height of hedges and the right to light.
For months, Stanley Neace had shown increasing hostility to his neighbours in rural eastern Kentucky, to the point where his landlord started eviction proceedings. Then he snapped over the way his wife had cooked his eggs, and killed her and four others with a shotgun before shooting himself.
Neighbours in the roadside mobile home park said Neace had stormed across several lawns in his pyjamas on Saturday and fired dozens of shots from a 12-gauge pump shotgun. When the rampage ended, Neace and his wife lay dead, along with the gunman's stepdaughter and three neighbours.
Trooper Jody Sims of the Kentucky State Police said Neace, 47, killed the five people in two mobile homes, then went to his home and turned the gun on himself. Investigators were still working today to piece together what had happened, Breathitt County's sheriff, Ray Clemons, said.
The state medical examiner's office in Frankfort was expected to carry out autopsies on all six who died.
Steve Smith, a neighbour, saw the shootings from the window of his mobile home. When he walked outside, Smith said Neace took a shot at him but missed.
"He chased his wife around that Jeep, shooting at her," Smith said. "I heard her screaming and running."
Sims said that when state police arrived about an hour after the gunfire began, they heard a single gunshot and found Neace's body on the porch in the unincorporated community of Mount Carmel in Breathitt County, which is home to about 16,000 people.
Sherri Anne Robinson, a relative of two of the victims, said witnesses to the shootings told her that Neace had become enraged when his wife did not cook his breakfast to his liking.
"She tried to run to tell my family and he shot them too because they found out about it," she said.
The victims were identified as the gunman's wife, Sandra Neace, 54; her daughter, Sandra R Strong, 28; and neighbours Dennis Turner, 31, Teresa Fugate, 30, and Tammy Kilborn, 40.
The names of the victims were provided by the Kentucky State police, while Robinson described their relationships. Fugate is Robinson's sister, Turner is her cousin and Kilborn was a witness who happened to step on to the porch of another mobile home when she heard the commotion.
Robinson said Fugate was shot in front of her seven-year-old daughter.
"Her daughter said, 'Please, please don't shoot me,' and he said, 'All right, you can leave,' and she ran out," said Robinson, who spoke to her niece after the shootings. "She went and told her neighbours, and the neighbours called the law."
Robinson said Neace had never appeared threatening to her, but that he was known to have a violent history. Sims could not confirm that Neace had a criminal record.The county prosecutor, Brendon Miller, said his dealings with Neace had been on nonviolent issues involving child support, and he had been in Miller's office a month ago regarding a traffic ticket.
Sims said that, when police arrived at the mobile home park, about 90 miles southeast of Lexington, they heard a single gunshot, then found Neace's body on his porch. They found victims in two other mobile homes.
"Over eggs?" Robinson said. "I thought that was crazy. Really. I mean just because his eggs weren't hot?"
Landlord Ray Rastegar said Neace received monthly disability checks from the Social Security Administration, though he didn't know what his disability was. Rastegar said he had begun the process of evicting Neace, who had lived in the trailer park for about seven years, because he had become more hostile towards neighbours in recent months.
"He was unpredictable," Rastegar said. "Little things would set him off."
Robert Collins, a neighbour, 50, said it wasn't the first time he had heard gunshots in the area. Neace often walked down to a nearby river to take practice shots, he said.
Smith said Neace ended up mumbling to himself on the porch of his trailer, pointed the shotgun at his head and pulled the trigger.
"He's been trouble ever since he's been here," Smith said. "He's always been trouble."
Police and ambulance services were called to the girl's home on a council estate in Gorton, Manchester, at around 7.30pm yesterday.
One neighbour described seeing the 16-year-old cradling his sister in his arms outside the house and screaming for an ambulance.
The girl had one gunshot wound to the head and died shortly before 9am today at Pendlebury children's hospital.
Her brother was arrested on suspicion of attempted murder last night and detectives continued to question him today.
It is understood he told the police that the shooting was an accident; a number of neighbours told reporters they believed it was an accident.
Superintendent John O'Hare, of Greater Manchester police, described the shooting as a "tragic event" and said it was not clear if any charges would be brought. He told reporters: "At this moment in time it is treated as a tragic event. Our hearts go out to the family and wider community that is affected by this."
Supt O'Hare would not give exact details of the weapon, other than to say it was a "powerful weapon" and a "section one firearm", a classification that includes conventional guns and high-powered air pistols or rifles. The classification excludes shotguns.
He said: "It's a weapon you should not have and should not have been with the individual last night. The weapon should not have been in those premises."
Neighbours said the girl's mother had spent the night by her daughter's bedside in hospital. The girl was originally taken to Manchester Royal Infirmary before being moved to the children's hospital.
The girl and her brother lived at the house with their mother and their two younger sisters, twins aged seven. Neighbours said the father of the children did not live there.
One neighbour, Hawa Kamara said she had been asleep in bed when she became aware of a commotion in the street at around 6pm. "I heard someone shouting: 'Call the ambulance, call the ambulance'," she said.
It is thought the teenager dragged his sister onto the street after the incident with the firearm happened inside.
Ms Kamara, a 39-year-old mother of four said: "I ran downstairs and went outside ... I saw the brother holding the sister on the ground, cradling her, and the two other girls were there as well. She was struggling. She had a mark on her forehead.
"I couldn't believe it. I have never seen a gunshot wound in my life. I was praying and thinking about her all night. It is such a shock."
Two officers were standing guard outside the house today.
One woman living a few doors away said she knew the family well. "The mum is in bits and hasn't been home, but [has been] at her daughter's bedside all night," she added. "They are just a lovely family."
The neighbour said she believed the shooting was a "terrible accident" and was "nothing gang-related or anything to do with drugs".
Gorton is a poor district around three miles south-east of Manchester which has been targeted for regeneration in recent years. Gun crime and gang violence are not big problems in the neighbourhood.
There are plenty of actors who have metaphorically shot themselves in the foot when playing that most tricky of Shakespearian roles, Antony, but RSC actor Darrell D'Silva is almost certainly the first to shoot himself in the hand. The press night of Michael Boyd's modern-dress revival of Antony and Cleopatra has been delayed after D'Silva sustained an unspecified injury from a stage gun during a technical rehearsal and subsequently required surgery. D'Silva is now back on stage with his hand bandaged and arm in a sling, although passionate embraces in the love scenes are proving tricky.
The RSC says that nobody else was involved in the incident. The police will not be called, as they were in Vienna in 2008 when an actor, required to slit his own throat in a production of Schiller's Mary Stuart, found blood spurting from his neck after the knife that he was using turned out not to be a blunt prop, but razor sharp. Unaware that what they were witnessing was real, the audience were deeply impressed by the authenticity of his acting. Fortunately the actor survived.
It is very unlikely that D'Silva sustained any kind of bullet injury, because stage guns tend either to be non-firing replicas or blank-firing firearms that look and sound like the real thing but would not be the weapon of choice in a shoot-out at the OK Corral. That's not to say that they are harmless; the latter have vents to allow gas to escape that could cause burns if incorrectly handled.
While most actors will have had some drama-school training in stage combat and fencing, fewer, unless they are unfortunate enough to be repeatedly cast in Guy Ritchie movies, will work regularly with gun replicas. But at least D'Silva wasn't messing about with the real thing. Last year, rehearsals for an amateur production of Steinbeck's Of Mice and Men in Florida came to an abrupt halt when one actor accidently shot off another's ear. He lived to tell the tale, which wasn't the case with Chung Ling Soo, known as "the marvellous Chinese conjuror", who was shot dead by his own assistants at the Wood Green Empire in 1918 while attempting to catch two bullets in his teeth. Which just goes to show that while working with children and animals can be bad for a performer's career, working with guns can prove fatal.
Efren Macias, 70, lives in a one-room rented apartment, only 1,000ft from a 15ft-high fence splitting El Paso from Mexico. His apartment is immaculately kept, the walls decorated with religious icons and pictures of his family, many of whose members live in Mexico.
Efren and his wife do not have a lot of money. They make about $1,000 a month from a small pension he receives and from her occasional home-care work. Yet they are content. ¡°I am happy. I have a roof. I have food. I am safe. I see my family. I am not sure what more you need.¡±
He is clear about another reason for his happiness: he is a US citizen. He was born and raised in Mexico but came to the United States as a young man. When asked why, he points to his injured left foot, the toes missing after a construction accident. ¡°There is work here. Even if it is dangerous work.¡± Then he shapes his hands into pretend guns, gestures towards the border, and sprays the neighborhood while making shooting noises. ¡°It isn¡¯t safe in Mexico. Here, it is safe.¡±
In a time when many Americans, especially lower income Americans, are angry, frustrated, and unhappy, polls show Latinos in the US are more optimistic.
I have spent much of the last three years documenting poverty across the US, and those polls seem to hold true. El Paso, Texas, is one of the poorest cities in the US. It is over 81% Latino and is one of the happiest places I have visited. Happiness in El Paso is less about how much you have today, than about how much you have compared with the past. It is about finding meaning beyond the material, about having family and religion.
El Paso lies in a narrow space between rugged mountains and the Rio Grande. From almost anywhere, you can see into Ciudad Juarez, a city of 1.3 million people just on the other side of a tall border fence. You can see its homes, its residents. They are constantly on display, a semi-silent drama playing out beyond the fence. The noises that are heard are often the sounds of violence, gunshots, sirens and yells.
The proximity to Ciudad Juarez¡¯s violence and poverty is a reminder to residents of El Paso of what they have, what they could lose, and what comes with being a US citizen: safety, family and freedom. As one resident, who was born on the other side of the fence, told me: ¡°I might be on the bottom of the escalator, but I am on the escalator, and it is going up.¡±
That happiness and pride is also reflected in a strong community ? and in the statistics. El Paso has some of the lowest rates of crime and drug abuse in the country.
When you walk through the neighborhoods, the signs of poverty are there, simple homes next to vast tracts of dull low-income housing, cars atop cinder blocks, corner stores with thick bulletproof shields. Yet throughout even the poorest neighborhoods you see a sense of community; you see neatness and order. There are well-kept homes, active churches and parks filled with families. Many of the businesses are locally run, which helps provide a sense of ownership.
Across the street from Efren¡¯s apartment is a corner store owned by Rodolfo Villarreal. Painted bright yellow, it flies both the American and Mexican flags. The store inside is well-stocked, clean and filled with religious icons, including a shrine resting on a Monster Energy drink display. Rodolfo is busy, splitting his time between stocking the shelves, running the register, and chatting with everyone who comes into the store.
Rodolfo bought the building and started the grocery seven years ago, after giving up running a similar store in Mexico. ¡°I was robbed too many times. Had too many demands for protection money.¡± He gestures across the fence: ¡°There is too much violence over there. I couldn¡¯t do my business, or live that way.¡±
¡°I came here with very, very little. I only knew how to work. We didn¡¯t have food stamps in Mexico, so my customers had to teach me about them.
At first, I had many rough years. But even then, I didn¡¯t ask for help or complain. I was safe, and I have my hard work and my religion. Others in this neighborhood came here for the same reasons: to work and to be safe. They are very good people.¡±
As in any large town, there are still plenty of drugs and people dealing with addiction. Veronica and Vito, both in their 30s, are trying to remove themselves from a past filled with drugs (crystal meth), prison and poverty. Vito removes his shirt, and points down to a large ¡°Fuck All¡± tattoo on his stomach. ¡°I guess this is how I felt growing up.¡±
They live in an apartment only yards from the border fence. Through it they can see Ciudad Juarez. For them, Mexico is more than a distant drama.
¡°At night, we hear lots of gunshots coming from the hills. Pop-pop-pops of gun battles. Sometimes you hear sirens, sometimes you don¡¯t. Almost always we hear the helicopters overhead. In the mornings we find stuff from people who have climbed over, ladders, boots, old knit caps. Sometimes they slingshot over packages of drugs. You hear a thud, and we know not to go outside.
¡°It is easy for people to come over. They just do it like this.¡± Vito shimmies up the fence, touches the top, and slides back down. ¡°I understand why they come. I mean, you hear what goes on over there and you are glad you are here.¡±
Despite the fence dividing El Paso from Ciudad Juarez, the two cities are mutually dependent, thanks to a steady stream of legal border crossings over the three pedestrian bridges. The immediate streets on either side have businesses for those crossing over.
In El Paso, the downtown is always crowded, filled with shoppers and workers coming from Mexico. Some, like Concepcion Hernandez and Azucena Rodriguez, come to shop at the lines of stores selling push-up bras, $10 jeans and dresses for celebrations. Others come into El Paso for work, although they might not be fully permitted to do so. Priscilla (name changed), 45, crosses twice weekly to clean houses. When she enters, she tells guards she is only there to shop, and returns to Mexico each evening. ¡°There are no good jobs in Ciudad Juarez. Just ones that pay badly.¡±
US citizens go Ciudad Juarez for cheaper professional services such as lawyers, pharmacies and doctors¡¯ offices. Naomi Torez crosses twice weekly to get physical therapy. Her job is also dependent on the traffic crossing the border. She sells bus tickets to Mexicans travelling to visit their relatives far beyond El Paso.
The tight bond between El Paso and Mexico has not only created plenty of opportunities for residents, but it also provides El Paso with energy, and a sense of success and optimism, by comparison. As much as residents love visiting Mexico, they especially love being back.
Hector Bernal, 28, stands with friends only yards from the border crossing. He was born in El Paso to parents from Ciudad Juarez. ¡°I haven¡¯t crossed the border into Mexico in two years. I mean, some stuff is cheaper over there, and I got relatives there. But stuff is just cooler over here.¡± He stops and points to all his friends. ¡°I mean, this is where my people are.¡±
A teenage boy killed after two gunmen opened fire on a group of four, died from a gunshot wound to the chest, tests revealed today.
A postmortem examination was carried out this morning on Samuel Adelagun, 16, at Walthamstow mortuary, police said.
The victim, from Newham, was shot in the early hours of yesterday on a patch of parkland in Plaistow, east London. A second boy, 15, was also shot and is in a stable condition in hospital.
A Metropolitan police spokesman said the group aged between 15 and 16 were attacked from behind by the gunmen at around 3.20am.
Adelagun was shot in the upper left chest, while the 15-year-old was shot in the abdomen.
No arrests have been made. The only description of the gunmen is that they were dressed in black and wearing balaclavas. It is not known if they travelled in a vehicle or on foot.
The group of friends ran away during the attack before meetingon Chesterton Road where they called the police. Detectives from the Met's Trident unit, which tackles gun-related crime within the black community, are investigating the death.
Annie Smith, 77, of Howards Road, which backs on to the parkland, said: "I heard two males shouting, then I went back to sleep. I heard three or four bangs. I thought it could be fireworks but it may have been shots.
"I then heard somebody shouting and someone answer faintly. They are just kids, why were they out so late?"
Floral tributes, including seven bunches of white roses, were laid at the scene. One read: "To Sammy, one of the realist young bucks. Gone but never forgotten. 100% love. Liam."
Detective chief inspector John Mackenzie said: "A number of shots were discharged and the youths dispersed. They then got together again outside Chesterton Road and knocked up an occupants' house, who provided some shelter as good Samaritans. Unfortunately one of the youths died and one was taken to hospital with a gunshot wound to the abdomen."
He said both victims were known to the police and one line of inquiry was that the incident was gang-related.
A man who was injured during demonstrations in Charlotte died on Thursday, as protesters and police prepared to face off for a third night.
Protesters were demonstrating over the death of Keith Scott on Tuesday. Police shot Scott in the parking lot of the apartment complex where he lived on the east side of town.
Details of what happened to the protester have been muddled, with conflicting explanations from city officials. At first the city¡¯s police chief, Kerr Putney, said the man had died on Wednesday night. That announcement was initially reversed.
The city also said the man, whose name has not been released, was injured during a ¡°civilian on civilian¡± shooting at an intersection. On Thursday afternoon, that explanation seemed increasingly tenuous.
¡°There was no fight,¡± said Eddie Thomas, an attorney and Charlotte public defender who was at the intersection in question to observe interactions between police and the public, he said. ¡°There was no issue between protesters. It just didn¡¯t happen.¡±
By Wednesday, the protests had migrated to the city¡¯s center, to a neighborhood called Uptown that features upscale shops and restaurants. The demonstrations began peacefully, Thomas said, but turned quickly when police in riot gear arrived.
¡°When it was the bicycle police everything was fine,¡± he said. ¡°I have no idea why they came out with riot gear. Within five minutes everything had escalated.¡±
He said protesters tried to enter the lobby of the Omni hotel, which had locked its doors. Protesters were shaking the glass doors when police fired off several rounds of tear gas.
¡°There were a lot of us out there who know the difference between a gunshot and a gas canister,¡± Thomas said. He examined the injured man, he said. The man was lying on the sidewalk, blood pouring from the back of his head. Thomas said he saw no entry wound in the front.
Thomas¡¯s estimation of what happened is that the protester was shot by a so-called ¡°less lethal¡± round, a gas canister, pepper ball or some other projectile that caused him to stumble back and hit his head on the brick sidewalk.
That account agrees with what other witnesses claimed to have seen.
¡°I saw the police shoot that man almost point blank with my own eyes,¡± Jimmy James Tyson wrote on Facebook. ¡°Police shot him close range in the side of the head with a rubber bullet.¡±
Authorities were bringing in outside help to prepare for any further demonstrations on Thursday night. Governor Pat McCrory declared a state of emergency and began bringing in national guard troops. The chief state prosecutor, Andrew Murray, asked the state bureau of investigation to help examine Scott¡¯s shooting.
Police planned to show video footage to Scott¡¯s family but had no plans to reveal it to the public.
Putney told a news conference that the video showed Scott, 43, was holding a gun and not a book, as the family has claimed.
¡°I can tell you we did not find a book,¡± he said. But, he added, the film did not clearly show Scott pointing the gun at anyone.
Later Putney changed his message again, saying on CNN that on the video he could not see Scott¡¯s hands at all.
The Fourth of July weekend was marred for some by a spate of gun violence in at least three cities across the US.
In Indianapolis, Indiana, seven people were shot ? including one who was critically injured ? early Saturday morning in an area known for its nightlife, police said.
An Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department officer heard multiple gunshots at around 2.30am Saturday in the city's Broad Ripple neighborhood, police spokesman Lieutenant Christopher Bailey said in a press release.
One man is in critical condition at a local hospital, Bailey said. Five other men and a woman also were shot, but do not have life-threatening injuries.
Meanwhile, at a music festival in Houston, Texas, authorities say six people have been injured in a shooting.
Houston police spokeswoman Jodi Silva said witnesses told police that a man opened fire just before 2am on Saturday morning inside an arena filled with several thousand fans attending the Houston Caribbean Festival. The shooter hit four men, leaving one in critical condition.
Silva says two women were hurt after people panicked and began to flee. She says the shooting victims were taken to hospitals, and one man is in critical condition. There have been no arrests.
The Chicago Tribune reported that at least 21 people were shot overnight, bringing the total number of people shot in the city since the three-day weekend began on Thursday afternoon to at least 36.
Three of the incidents involved police shootings, the Tribune reports.
During last year¡¯s Fourth of July weekend, shootings in Chicago left at least 12 people dead and more than 62 wounded, NBC's local Chicago affiliate reported at the time.
Despite having some of the nation¡¯s strictest firearm laws, Chicago still suffers from widespread gun violence, which mayor Rahm Emanuel has called the city¡¯s ¡°most urgent problem¡±.
The investigation into the killing of a Syrian-born preacher in London has escalated after two people were arrested on suspicion of terror offences.
Detectives are questioning a 53-year-old woman and a 61-year-old man suspected of being involved in the ¡°commission, preparation and instigation¡± of terrorist acts over the fatal shooting of Abdul Hadi Arwani.
The arrests came as the investigation focused on the An-Noor mosque in west London, where Arwani was imam from 2005 until 2011 and which police officers have combed for clues since Tuesday night.
Arwani, 48, was found slumped behind the wheel of his Volkswagen Passat in the Greenhill area of Wembley, northwest London, last Tuesday morning. He had been shot five times in the chest.
The shooting sent shockwaves through the local Muslim community and triggered a rapidly-moving investigation by Scotland Yard¡¯s SO15 counter-terror detectives, who were on Thursday questioning Burnell Mitchell, a Muslim convert and a director of the An-noor mosque, on suspicion of terror offences and conspiracy to murder.
At the dilapidated two-storey mosque, a few hundred yards from Acton High Street, plain clothes officers came and went through the front entrance as uniformed police formed a cordon around the perimeter.
An official from the mosque sitting in his car outside the building declined to comment. A few hundred yards away a group of friends who said they had prayed at the mosque for years said the closure and prolonged police search was having an big impact on the community.
¡°No one knows what is going to happen, is it going to open again?¡± said one man who did not want to be named. ¡°I am a bit sad to be honest. We can go to other mosques to worship but that was our place and this has got nothing to do with us ... surely after all this time in there the police could open the mosque now and still carry on their investigations?¡±Arwani was a founding member of the mosque which was attended by the son of radical preacher Abu Hamza. In November 2013, a terror suspect evaded capture by leaving the mosque dressed in a burqa at a time when he was the subject of a control order.Police have been told that Arwani, a part-time builder and a vocal critic of Syrian president Bashar al-Assad, went to the Wembley area two days before his murder to apparently provide a quote for some building work.Arwani went to the area again at around 9am last Tuesday. He was found two hours later with five gunshot wounds, slumped over the wheel of his car with the engine still running and his side window wound half-way down.
Detectives are investigating whether the father-of-six was embroiled in a dispute over money with figures at the An-Noor mosque, where he was ousted in 2011 and formally quit as a director the following year. However, the arrests on Wednesday evening show that police are still considering whether the killing was terror-inspired.
Leslie Cooper, 36, a Jamaican businessman who runs a clothing company, was charged on Tuesday with murdering Arwani.
In a brief hearing at the Old Bailey on Thursday morning, Cooper was told he faces a three-to-four week trial starting on 12 October. Wearing dark green prison-issue jogging bottoms and a jumper, Cooper appeared via video link from HMP Thameside for the short procedural hearing. He spoke only to confirm his name.
The judge, Nicholas Hilliard QC, the Recorder of London, remanded Cooper in custody and ordered him to appear for a plea and case management hearing at the Old Bailey on 2 July.
Barrister Oliver Glasgow, who has acted for the Crown in a string of terror-related cases including the Woolwich murder trial, is prosecuting the case. Stephen Vullo QC, who acted for former BBC Radio 1 DJ Dave Lee Travis in his indecent assault trials, represented Cooper.
Metropolitan police officers outside the An-noor mosque on Thursday said the search would continue as long as necessary. A Scotland Yard spokesman said: ¡°Officers are fully aware of the sensitivities of conducting this search at this time and would like to thank the local Muslim community for their support and patience thus far in the necessary investigations that have occurred to date.
¡°This remains a murder investigation and a search for the truth; it is therefore vital that the investigation is thorough which includes a detailed searches of premises. Community leaders have actively provided advice and support throughout this investigation and continue to provide guidance in relation to the sensitivities of conducting the search at the An Noor Cultural Community Centre.¡±
? This article was amended on 7 May 2015 to delete a reference that is inconsistent with Guardian editorial guidelines.
James Brady, the affable, witty press secretary who survived a devastating head wound in the 1981 assassination attempt on President Ronald Reagan and undertook a personal crusade for gun control, died Monday. He was 73.
¡°We are heartbroken to share the news that our beloved Jim ¡°Bear¡± Brady has passed away after a series of health issues,¡± Brady¡¯s family said in a statement. ¡°His wife, Sarah, son, Scott, and daughter, Missy, are so thankful to have had the opportunity to say their farewells.¡±
Brady, who spent much of the rest of his life in a wheelchair, died at a retirement community in suburban Alexandria, Virginia, where he lived with his wife.
He suffered a bullet wound to his head in the assassination attempt outside the Washington Hilton Hotel on 30 March, 1981. Although he returned to the White House only briefly, he was allowed to keep the title of presidential press secretary and his White House salary until Reagan left office in January 1989.
Former first lady Nancy Reagan said she was ¡°deeply saddened to learn of Jim Brady¡¯s passing today. Thinking of him brings back so many memories ? happy and sad ? of a time in all of our lives when we learned what it means to ¡®play the hand we¡¯re dealt.¡¯¡±
¡°I still remember vividly that day in March 1981, when Sarah and I sat together in a tiny room near the emergency room at George Washington University Hospital, trying to comfort each other while we both were gripped with unspeakable fear,¡± Mrs Reagan said. ¡°The bond we established then was unlike any other.¡±
A federal law requiring a background check on handgun buyers bears his name, as does the White House press briefing room.
President Barack Obama described Brady as a White House legend, who turned ¡°the events of that terrible afternoon into a remarkable legacy of service.¡± Thanks to Brady and the law bearing his name, ¡°an untold number of people are alive today who otherwise wouldn¡¯t be,¡± the president said in a statement.
Josh Earnest, Obama¡¯s press secretary, said Brady ¡°showed his patriotism and commitment to the country by being very outspoken on an issue that was important to him and that he felt very strongly about.¡±
Of the four people struck by gunfire in the assassination attempt by John Hinckley Jr ? later found to be insane ? Brady was the most seriously wounded. A news clip of the shooting, replayed often on television, showed Brady sprawled on the ground as secret service agents hustled the wounded president into his limousine. Reagan was shot in one lung while a policeman and a secret service agent suffered lesser wounds.
Brady never regained full health. The shooting caused brain damage, partial paralysis, short-term memory impairment, slurred speech and constant pain.
The TV replays of the shooting did take a toll on Brady, however. He told The Associated Press years later that he relived the moment each time he saw it: ¡°I want to take every bit of (that) film ... and put them in a cement incinerator, slosh them with gasoline and throw a lighted cigarette in.¡± With remarkable courage, he endured a series of brain operations in the years after the shooting.
On 28 November, 1995, while he was in an oral surgeon¡¯s office, Brady¡¯s heart stopped beating and he was taken to a hospital. His wife, Sarah, credited the oral surgeon and his staff with saving Brady¡¯s life.
Brady remained as transition spokesman after Reagan¡¯s election. But his advisers appeared hesitant to give Brady the White House spokesman¡¯s job. Mrs Reagan was said to feel the job required someone younger and better-looking than the 40-year-old, moon-faced, balding Brady.
¡°I come before you today not as just another pretty face, but out of sheer talent,¡± Brady told reporters. A week later, he got the job.
He was divorced from the former Sue Beh when, in 1973, he courted Sarah Jane Kemp, the daughter of an FBI agent who was working with him in a congressional office.
Sarah Brady became involved in gun-control efforts in 1985, and later chaired Handgun Control Inc, but Brady took a few more years to join her, and Reagan did not endorse their efforts until 10 years after he was shot. Reagan¡¯s surprise endorsement ? he was a longtime National Rifle Association member and opponent of gun control laws ? began to turn the tide in Congress.
¡°They¡¯re not going to accuse him of being some bed-wetting liberal, no way can they do that,¡± said Brady, who had become an active lobbyist for the bill.
The Brady law ? formally known as the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act ? required a five-day wait and background check before a handgun could be sold. In November 1993, as President Bill Clinton signed the bill into law, Brady said: ¡°Every once in a while you need to wake up and smell the propane. I needed to be hit in the head before I started hitting the bricks.¡±
Gun control efforts ran aground in the current Congress, however. Despite the December 2012 slayings at an elementary school in Newtown, Connecticut, when 20 children and six adults were killed, a drive to expand background checks and a ban on assault-like weapons died in the Senate ? due in part to opposition by the National Rifle Association.
Clinton awarded Brady the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1996. In 2000, the press briefing room at the White House was renamed in Brady¡¯s honor. The following year, Handgun Control Inc, was renamed the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence as a tribute to Brady and his wife.
Authorities say a man shot an armadillo, but ended up accidentally wounding his mother-in-law when the bullet ricocheted off the mammal¡¯s hard shell.
Sheriff¡¯s deputies told WALB-TV that 54-year-old Larry McElroy fired his 9mm pistol at the armadillo on Sunday night in the southern state of Georgia.
Deputies say the bullet killed the armadillo, but bounced off the animal, hit a fence, traveled through the back door of the mother-in-law¡¯s mobile home and the recliner in which she was sitting, striking her in the back.
McElroy¡¯s 74-year-old mother-in-law, Carol Johnson, suffered injuries described as non-life-threatening. Sheriff¡¯s investigator Bill Smith said she was walking and talking afterward.
Sherriff¡¯s deputies say McElroy was about 100 yards (90 meters) away from the home when he shot the armadillo.
Photographs have emerged that show Rohingya refugees, some of them children, bearing bullet wounds and burn scars apparently sustained during a Myanmar army crackdown.
The new evidence, documented by humanitarian agencies and rights organisations, adds credence to claims that Myanmar¡¯s military committed atrocities against ethnic Rohingya communities during a counterinsurgency campaign that ended this year.
The material surfaced after Aung San Suu Kyi, Myanmar¡¯s de facto civilian leader, told journalists during a visit to the EU last week she did not support a fact-finding mission into alleged abuses against the Rohingya. The UN human rights council mandated an inquiry in a March resolution.
Government and military officials have repeatedly rebutted allegations of widespread abuse.
Violence flared up in Myanmar¡¯s restive Rakhine state in October last year after coordinated armed attacks on three border guard posts by a previously unknown Rohingya militant movement. Nine security personnel were killed in the unrest.
Myanmar¡¯s military and parts of the police force subsequently undertook ¡°clearance operations¡± against the rebels in an area north of Maungdaw, a town close to the border with Bangladesh.
Amnesty International and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the UN¡¯s human rights watchdog, allege that these military sweeps involved widespread and systematic abuse of Rohingya communities, including gang rape, torture and murder. The campaign prompted more than 75,000 Rohingya to flee across the border into the Cox¡¯s Bazar region of Bangladesh and displaced tens of thousands within Myanmar.
Zeid Ra¡¯ad Al Hussein, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, and Yanghee Lee, the UN¡¯s special rapporteur on Myanmar, have both claimed Myanmar¡¯s security forces are probably responsible for ¡°crimes against humanity¡±. Officials from the UN agencies believe more than a thousand Rohingya could have been killed during the crackdown.
Photographs of wounded Rohingya seen by the Guardian appear to strengthen claims that serious abuses occurred. The images support allegations made in a UN report (pdf) that included interviews with hundreds of Rohingya refugees who recently fled Myanmar for Bangladesh.
The report¡¯s authors said that ¡°the army deliberately set fire to houses with families inside¡± and ¡°in other cases pushed Rohingya into already burning houses¡±.
The photos were obtained by the Burmese Rohingya Organisation of the UK, a London-based advocacy group, for a forthcoming report.
One image showed a seven-year-old boy with severe blistering on both thighs. The boy and his mother claim the military were responsible for his injuries, which are consistent with burn wounds.
¡°When the military burnt my house,¡± said the boy¡¯s mother, ¡°I could not prevent my son from being burnt.¡±
Another image appeared to show a bullet wound in the leg of a seven-year-old boy. He claims he was injured when the Myanmar military conducted a raid on his village: ¡°I saw the military, and was shot as I fled.¡±
Other children with serious wounds include a five-year-old girl with a ¡°deep burn¡± on the skin around her fingers, an injury she received when she had been pushed into fires by the military, according to her mother. Her life was saved by the intervention of a bystander.
¡°Someone pulled my child from the flames. She was unconscious for three days afterwards,¡± said the girl¡¯s mother.
Four other organisations claim to have seen similar scarring on the bodies of Rohingya refugees who arrived in Bangladesh during the violence.
A spokesman for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees in Bangladesh said: ¡°It is known to our staff that there were people with such reported injuries as gunshot wounds and burns among those who were seeking assistance from the registered refugees inside the camps. They were generally adults and teenagers. They were referred as quickly as possible for medical attention through NGOs and local hospitals.¡±
The photographs have prompted renewed calls for Myanmar to cooperate with the UN¡¯s fact-finding mission.
The OHCHR said: ¡°Given the compelling nature of the testimonies collected by various credible groups, if the area remains closed off to investigators it will add to suspicions that the authorities would prefer to let impunity reign than to achieve meaningful accountability.¡±
The government of Myanmar has not yet responded to requests for comment.
CCTV footage of a man firing a gun as he chases his victims down the street has been released by south London police.
The clip shows a group of three men walking along Tulse Hill in Brixton when the pillion passenger on a passing moped jumps off the bike and opens fire.
As the trio flee, the gunman chases them and takes a second shot. He then runs back to the bike, which heads towards Norwood.
One victim suffered a gunshot wound to the thigh in the attack, which happened at about 7pm on 7 February.
Scotland Yard said the rider of the moped was wearing a light-coloured helmet. The gunman was wearing a black, full-face helmet with white flashings, and dark trousers with white stripes.
Anyone with information can call police on 020 8247 4863 or Crimestoppers, anonymously, on 0800 555 111.
CCTV video released by London¡¯s Metropolitan police shows three suspects, one armed with a shotgun, shooting a 21-year-old man and a 16-year-old schoolboy. The incident happened on 12 May on a residential street in Brixton, south London
A white Chicago police officer has been charged with murder over the shooting death of a black teenager, just one day before a deadline by which a judge has ordered the city to release a squad-car video of the incident.
Veteran officer Jason Van Dyke was indicted on Tuesday on a first-degree murder charge after shooting 17-year-old Laquan McDonald 16 times. The officer was denied bail at a hearing in Chicago¡¯s main criminal courthouse hours after the state¡¯s attorney, Anita Alvarez, announced the charges against him.
City officials and community leaders have been bracing for the release of the video, fearing an outbreak of unrest and demonstrations similar to what occurred in Ferguson, Baltimore and other cities after young African American men were killed by police. The judge ordered the dash-cam recording to be released by 25 November after city officials had argued for months that it could not be made public until the conclusion of several investigations.At a press conference before the video¡¯s official release, Alvarez said the officer¡¯s actions ¡°were not justified or the proper use of deadly force by an officer¡±.
¡°I have absolutely no doubt that this video will tear at the hearts of Chicagoans,¡± she said.
Documents filed in court describe the video¡¯s contents, in which the teen is said to be shown walking away from officers on a Chicago street. As McDonald turns away, Van Dyke takes one step towards the teen and begins to fire his gun, the description says.
For 14 to 15 seconds, according the documents prepared by the state¡¯s attorney¡¯s office, the officers unloads his entire gun into the teen, who spends 13 seconds laying face down on the pavement with his arms and legs jerking from the shots making contact with his body. Three clouds of smoke appear during the incident that indicate shots hitting the pavement, according to officials.
Of the eight or more officers on the scene, Van Dyke is the only one to have discharged his weapon.
¡°With release of this video,¡± Alvarez said, ¡°it¡¯s really important for public safety that the citizens of Chicago know that this officer is being held responsible for his actions.¡±
Chicago mayor, Rahm Emanuel, said in a statement that Van Dyke violated ¡°professional standards¡± and also the ¡°moral standards that bind our community together¡±.
¡°Rather tahn uphold the law, he took the law into his own hands and it¡¯s up to the justice system to hold him accountable,¡± Emanuel said. ¡°But his actions are in no way a reflection of the dedication and professionalism that our police officers exemplify every day and that our residents expect throughout our city.¡±
Van Dyke is the first on-duty officer to be charged with murder while working for the Chicago police department in nearly 35 years.
Since the death of McDonald, the Chicago police union and the lawyer representing the officer have maintained that he felt that McDonald presented a serious danger to Van Dyke and other officers.
¡°I can¡¯t speak to why the [other] officers didn¡¯t shoot,¡± the lawyer representing Van Dyke, Daniel Herbet, told reporters on Friday, according to the Chicago Tribune. ¡°But I certainly can speak to why my client shot, and it is he believed in his heart of hearts that he was in fear for his life, that he was concerned about the lives of [other] police officers.¡±
Since the incident, Van Dyke has been on paid desk leave while both federal and state investigations into the incident took place.
According to a freedom of information request by the Chicago Tribune, the veteran officer has had at least 15 complaints filed against him while working in high-crime neighborhoods, for accusations including using racial epithets and pointing a gun at an arrestee without justification.
In 2007, the officer was involved in a traffic stop in which he and his partner were found to have used excessive force on a man with no prior convictions, leading to a $350,000 award for damages in the case, the Tribune reported.
Chicago police also moved late on Monday to discipline a second officer who had shot and killed an unarmed black woman in 2012, in another incident causing tensions between the department and minority communities. Superintendent Garry McCarthy recommended firing officer Dante Servin for the shooting of 22-year-old Rekia Boyd, saying Servin showed ¡°incredibly poor judgment¡± even though a jury had acquitted him of involuntary manslaughter and other charges last April.Mayor Rahm Emanuel called together a number of community leaders on Monday to appeal for help calming the emotions that have built up over the McDonald shooting.
Some attendees of the community meeting said afterward that city officials waited too long after McDonald was shot to get them involved.
¡°You had this tape for a year and you are only talking to us now because you need our help keeping things calm,¡± one of the ministers, Corey Brooks, said after the meeting.
Ira Acree, who described the meeting with Emanuel as ¡°very tense, very contentious¡±, said the mayor expressed concerns about the prospect of any demonstrations getting out of control.
Another minister who attended, Jedidiah Brown, said emotions were running so high that there would be no stopping major protests once the video was released.
The fears of unrest stem from longstanding tensions between the Chicago police and minority communities, partly due to the department¡¯s dogged reputation for brutality, particularly involving black residents. Dozens of men, mostly African American, said they were subjected to torture at the hands of a Chicago police squad headed by former commander Jon Burge from the 1970s to the early 1990s, and many spent years in prison. Burge was eventually convicted of lying about the torture and served four years in prison.The two ministers said black people in the city are upset because the officer, though stripped of his police powers, has been assigned to desk duty and not fired.
¡°They had the opportunity to be a good example and a model across the country on how to improve police and community relations and they missed it,¡± Acree said.
The Chicago police department said placing an officer on desk duty after a shooting is standard procedure and that it is prohibited from doing anything more during the investigations.
The Associated Press contributed to this report
The Fifty Shades of Grey sequel, Fifty Shades Darker, will shoot in Paris in the first half of this year, it has been announced, confirming that film-making activity in the French capital has not been driven away by November¡¯s terrorist attacks.
According to Stephane Martinet, deputy director of the Ile-de-France Film Commission, the industry was showing its support for the city. ¡°It seems there is some resilience among the film industry. Producers, in particular from the US, voiced their support to us after the attacks and reinforced their willingness to pursue their projects ... They want to send a message.¡±
The Bollywood producer-director Aditya Chopra has chosen Paris as the principal location for his ¡°nu-experimental¡± feature Befikre, his first directorial project since 2008¡¯s Rab Ne Bana Di Jodi.
According to Film France¡¯s Melanie Chebance, there are at least 10 film shoots currently under way in Paris. ¡°There is an increased security level for everyone, but film shoots are proceeding as usual,¡± she said.
Applications for filming permits in the city dipped in November and December 2015 in the wake of the attacks, but enthusiasm appears to have now returned to pre-attack levels. However, there are some restrictions ? for example, on the use of gunshot sounds during street filming.
French government officials are also taking steps to make the country a more attractive filming location, with tax breaks extended to a 30% rebate for blockbusters (though the rebate ceiling is $30m). The push was assisted by a visit to the US by the French culture minister, Fleur Pellerin, who told AFP that the plan was to ¡°attract shoots with budgets of $80m to $100m¡±.
¡°Some directors were going to shoot abroad and are now going to do so in France,¡± said Pellerin. ¡°Among American studios, there are decisions on shooting that will be taken and could be now be done in France.¡±
Other productions to benefit include the Christopher Nolan-directed Dunkirk, and Neil Jordan¡¯s TV series Riviera.
A 73-year-old man died and two others were injured after a man drove a car into pedestrians in a square in the centre of Heidelberg.
The attacker, who was armed with a knife, fled before being surrounded by police in the south-western German town.
After a stand-off, the man was shot once by an officer, according to video of the incident posted on social media, then taken to hospital.
On Saturday night, Mannheim police said the man suspected of carrying out the attack was a 35-year-old German, and that they did not suspect any terrorist motive.
Witnesses told the Rhein-Neckar-Zeitung newspaper that the black Opel car had been waiting at a red light near Bismarckplatz, a busy area in the centre of Heidelberg.
After the lights turned green, the car was driven directly at a crowd in a pedestrianised zone near a busy tram and bus stop, outside a Grimminger bakery. The car hit three people then struck a pillar, but was not going fast enough to trip the airbag.
The driver got out and ran away from the tram station carrying a knife, but was spotted by bystanders who alerted the police. Officers trapped the man near the entrance to a shopping complex and ordered him to drop the knife, but, according to local media, he refused and was shot.
Mannheim police said in a statement last night: ¡°Shortly before 4pm, a suspect drove into a group of people in Bismarckplatz in Heidelberg in front of a local bakery branch.
¡°This injured three people, one of them seriously. Afterwards, the suspect climbed out of the vehicle and moved away on foot, armed with a knife, towards Bergheimer Stra©¬e.
¡°In front of the Altes Hallenbad, he was identified by a police patrol on the advice of passersby. During the arrest, the police officers used firearms.¡±
Later, police said: ¡°The person who was initially seriously injured died at 6pm in a Heidelberg clinic. He was a 73-year-old German national.¡±
The police said the two other injured people were a 32-year-old Austrian man and a 29-year-old woman from Bosnia-Herzegovina. They received treatment at the scene and were discharged.
¡°The suspect is a 35-year-old German,¡± the police said, who was receiving treatment for his gunshot wounds.
¡°According to the current investigation, there are no indications of a terrorist background.¡±
After persistent speculation that the German suspect was a naturalised immigrant, Mannheim police tweeted: ¡°And now for everyone - a German WITHOUT a migration background¡±
Germany has been on high alert since a truck ploughed into a crowded Christmas market in Berlin in December, killing 12 people. A Tunisian suspect was shot dead days later by police in Italy.
? This article was amended on 27 February 2017. An earlier version said the suspect was arrested at the entrance to a swimming pool. The Altes Hallenbad was a bath house until 1981 but now accommodates a hotel, supermarket and restaurants.
A man who was shot by police when he attacked security agents with a machete at a New Orleans airport on Friday has died in hospital, police said on Saturday. Richard White, 63, was carrying six homemade explosives when he attacked agents at the airport with wasp killer spray and a machete. He had a history of mental illness, officials said.
¡°No one at this point in time has any notion of what triggered this behaviour,¡± Jefferson Parish Sheriff Newell Normand said at a news conference earlier on Saturday. ¡°His family has been very cooperative. We have been able to determine that there is a mental illness component here.¡°
White died after the news conference, at around 4pm local time (2100 GMT), police said.
White sprayed the Transportation Security Administration agents at about 8pm on Friday at a security checkpoint at the Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport. A TSA agent threw a bag at White and slowed him down. White then brandished a machete and chased an unarmed TSA agent, until he was shot three times by a sheriff¡¯s officer.
During the attack, White dropped a bag containing a lighter and six glass jars with cloth wicks in gasoline, commonly known as a Molotov cocktails, Normand said. Officials found tanks of acetylene, freon and oxygen in White¡¯s car at the airport, but do not know what their purpose was.
Federal agents arrived at the scene, the concourse was cleared, and planes were moved to other concourses.
White, who lived near the airport and had worked as a taxi driver, had refused some types of medical attention because of religious beliefs, officials said.
Transportation Security Officer Carol Richel praised Lieutenant Heather Slyve of the sheriff¡¯s office, who shot White. ¡°Officer Slyve is my hero,¡± Richel said. ¡°She probably saved my life because he was within inches of whacking me ... She saved a lot of people¡¯s lives. This man was swinging very hard with the machete.¡±
A gun fanatic who lured a total stranger to a deserted, rural railway station and shot him dead was jailed for a minimum of 30 years yesterday.
Colin Cheetham, 61, of Ripley, Derbyshire, had been convicted of murdering a taxi driver, 41-year-old Stuart Ludlam, at Cromford railway station, just south of Matlock in Derbyshire, in September 2009. The body of the father-of-three was found in his own vehicle. He had been made to kneel in the boot and was shot in the head, Nottingham Crown Court heard.
The prosecutor, Peter Joyce, QC said Cheetham appeared to have no motive other than the desire to shoot a "complete stranger". He had planned the killing "meticulously", reconnoitring the location to choose the best time and place to carry out the killing.
Ludlam was shot as soon as he arrived at Cromford station. He was found with two gunshot wounds to the head by a holidaymaker, Peter Noble, who dialled 999.
Records showed the mobile phone used by Cheetham, who was previously a member of a gun club, to call Ludlam was bought from Morrison's supermarket in Derby.
Officers searching Cheetham's house also found a camera and photographs of various train stations ? including Cromford ? while he had also researched train timetables to ensure the killing could take place in a secluded location.
Opening the prosecution's case, Joyce said: "It was his [Cheetham's] gun, he had planned it, it was his phone. He had no knowledge of Mr Ludlam but he had a fascination with taxis and a fascination with guns and Mr Ludlam was just the unlucky man with whom this fascination ended."
During the trial it was claimed that Cheetham was caught only because he made the error of topping up his mobile phone ? which had been bought with cash ? on his credit card.
Yesterday Detective Chief Superintendent Tony Blockley, from Derbyshire police, said: "Colin Cheetham is an evil man who carried out a despicable act which was seemingly motiveless.
"This crime was totally unpredictable. My own personal point of view is that he has executed Mr Ludlam simply to see what it would be like to kill someone due to his personal fascination with firearms.
"My only hope is at some point he can explain to someone why he has done this as we have never been able to prove a motive or glean the real story about what happened from Cheetham. That leaves many unanswered questions for Mr Ludlam's family and friends."
Another man, Andrew Brough, 57, of Heanor, Derbyshire, previously pleaded guilty to firearms offences in connection with the investigation. He will be sentenced on 22 July.
? This article was amended on 30 June 2010. The original referred to Mr Ludlam topping up his mobile phone on his credit card. This has been corrected.
The first time that I passed out on the Chicago L train, I just knew that I was dying from mad cow disease. At least that's what I told my doctor when I was trying to self-diagnose in his office, and he was pretty impressed by the depths of my neurosis. Understand, this was before WebMD when everyone could do it. But he assured me that despite the fact that I had been to Europe and eaten several steaks, I wasn't suffering from mad cow. I had anxiety. And he asked me if there was anything that had happened recently that had been causing stress, and I had to think about the question for a little while. I said, "You know, I haven't been adjusting well to my move to Chicago," and he nodded his head and said, "You know, a transition like that into a new city can cause a lot of stress."
I said, "My father's dying of cancer, and I can't convince him to take better care of himself." He nodded again; this was obviously a story he'd heard a lot of times before. Then I said, "My daughter almost died last year from febrile seizures, and I'm pretty much terrified to be left alone with her." Now this raised his eyebrows. He wrote me a prescription for Xanax and gave me the name of a therapist he wanted me to see right away to delve into this further. Now, I don't know what prompted me to say what I said next, but as he handed me the prescription, I just blurted it out: "There's one more thing: When I was 14 years old, I shot my best friend in the face accidentally, and I watched him die."
Henry was one of seven people to die that day in New York City, 1988. At 14, he wasn't even the youngest ? a 12-year-old kid from Queens had that dubious distinction. But his was the death that I saw with my own eyes. The one that I was responsible for with my own hands, and the one I'm going to carry with me for the rest of my life.
Now, home back then was a two-bedroom co-op in the Kensington section of Brooklyn. It was a big source of pride for my mom, who had raised my three older sisters and me almost single-handedly since splitting from my dad when I was four years old. This was the first place that she owned, after what had seemed like an annual ritual of moving. Now, for those who don't know, New York was really violent and dangerous back then. Like Detroit, New Orleans, and Gary, Indiana, rolled-into-one dangerous. You know, 2,000-murders-a-year violent. But I never let the violence swirling around in the world outside ever impact me. I was actually an honour roll student all the way. And when Henry and I met in the seventh grade, we got along immediately. The physical contrast couldn't have been more extreme. He was unusually muscular and well-built for a 12-year-old, and I was just as oddly tall and lanky for a kid the same age. But that's pretty much where our differences ended. We both were into all the same things. We shared all of the same fears. We walked together every day after school to the Carroll Street subway station in south Brooklyn. And we both hated the older boys from John Jay High School nearby, who'd show up every Halloween and rain rotten eggs, D-cell batteries, and of course water balloons filled with Nair on our heads, which gave you a nice surprise when you got home and tried to clean up.
He was my first and best friend. Now on the afternoon of 14 April 1988, Henry and Chris, another friend of mine, came by my apartment like they had many times before. They dropped their book bags and plopped down on my bed. My mother was a captain in the Army Reserves at this time; we had three guns in the house. The .38-caliber revolver was my favourite, not just because it was the one that was kept loaded. It was just the most interesting. It looked like a gun from the movies, and it was the one I always showed to my friends, even though my mom never knew about it. And this day was no different. I started off by emptying the gun, made sure all the bullets were out. Then I demonstrated my index finger spin ? the cowboy move that I'd been working on. Then I took a single bullet, pretended to insert it into the cylinder, and pointed the gun at my friends. I can actually remember smiling as I pulled the trigger, ready to shout, "Gotcha!" when I made them jump. But instead of the dull click of a hammer followed by laughter, there was a muzzle flash, an explosion, and shock. Both of my friends, Chris and Henry, had turned their backs to me, and I remember being overcome with confusion. How did the fuckin' bullet get into the chamber?
Chris turned and looked at me, and my heart started racing, and we both looked over at Henry. I guess we were waiting for him to turn around, say, "Oh shit," and then tell me how much trouble I was gonna get into when my mother got home. Now, whenever we're faced with something horrific, I think it's human instinct to want to run, and mentally that's what I did. I just fled into my own psyche. I went back years to being with my father at Coney Island on the pier, trying to catch a bluefish with my piece-of-shit rod and reel, and then the next thing you know, I was back there in the hallway, and it was full of people. My mom was there now, sobbing. The paramedics were there. Of course, the cops were there. When one of the paramedics came out of the apartment, I remember begging him, "Please tell me he's OK, please tell me he's OK," and even though I knew what he was gonna say, I just wasn't prepared for the words. He just said, "He's gone."
That night in the police station I had to recount in detail everything that had happened. I didn't want to. I wanted to crawl under that table and hide. But I did, slowly, methodically, choking back tears when I looked down and realised that my sweatshirt was covered in blood. My dad was there ? I almost never saw him at that time ? but he was there with my mom, with the same forlorn look on his face. The wake came about a week later, and I didn't think Henry's family would have any interest in me attending, but my mom insisted we go. So when we got to the funeral home, there was a huge crowd gathered around the coffin, and I made my way over to Henry. He looked really nice. They had him in a really nice blue suit. But I remember the coffin making him look so small. And I just stood there and stared at him while everyone else around me wailed. That's when I suddenly heard this woman's voice. She said, "I JUST WANT TO SEE HIM!" and I remember it made me jump, because I didn't know whether she was talking about Henry lying there in a coffin, or me, his killer, standing over him, crying on to his jacket. I knew every eye in the funeral home was on me, and all I could do was just close my eyes and wish that I was someplace else.
Miraculously, Henry's family did not want to press charges. They embraced me and offered their forgiveness, and when the Brooklyn DA hit me with a long list of charges, ranging from manslaughter to assault with a deadly weapon ? I think it was 17 charges in total ? they were the ones who stood up and said they didn't want to destroy two young lives instead of one. They're the reason that, instead of going to jail, I got one year of counselling. That was my sentence. I remember thanking them profusely outside of the courthouse that day for giving me a second chance when I didn't think I deserved one. In the years that followed, I thought it was odd that no one ? none of my friends, none of my family ? ever said a single word about Henry. Everyone went about their lives as though he had never existed. The entire incident was wiped from my record when I was 16, so it hadn't even existed in a legal sense, and if I never mentioned it again, it would never come up.
But I thought about it, the shooting and Henry, almost every fuckin' day. And oddly enough, it's what drove me for a number of years. Ask any friend of mine in college; I was the most anal-retentive dude they ever met. I wouldn't touch alcohol. I wouldn't smoke a cigarette. Don't get me wrong, I made up for it years later. But I just felt like I had to do him proud. I had to be perfect. And for a long period of time, I thought I was doing it. Successful career. Faithful husband. Doting father to my daughter, who I watched grow from an infant into a toddler. When my daughter got sick at 18 months, it pretty much derailed all of it. We rushed her to the hospital, her body was convulsing, and all of a sudden all of these emotions and feelings I hadn't felt since I was 14 came rushing back. The feeling of panic, the feeling of helplessness. And that's when it dawned on me, Maybe this is it. Maybe this is gonna be my sentence, that I'm gonna have to see what it's like to lose a child. And, you know, miraculously, she did survive, and the doctor assured me that some children just have a really low tolerance for fever, and it's something that she would almost certainly grow out of. But the damage was done, and when we got back home, everything was just completely different. I was terrified to be left alone with her. I felt like this marked man, and the second it was just me and her, something was gonna go wrong.
It didn't help that after she got sick, a recurring dream I was having about Henry began to repeat itself with disturbing frequency. And it was always the same dream: in the dream I'd be asleep, I'd wake up, sit up in my bed, and he'd be sitting there on the edge of my bed, staring at me, with the bullet hole still in his chin, about the size of a nickel.
I'd start talking to him. I'd say, "Hey, how are you doing?" and his blank face would just show no expression. And after a while, I'd start getting desperate and pleading with him. I'd start asking him if he knew how sorry I was. I'd ask him if he knew that it was an accident. I'd ask him if he knew how much I missed him. Then finally he would open his mouth and try to respond, but just like on that day, the bullet stopped him from speaking, and he just gasped for air. I'd break down in tears, and I'd wake up crying in bed.
And this dream repeated itself for years. Henry always there, staring at me, the same, and me just getting older and older and older. Fourteen, 18, 21, 25, 30, and starting to grey. It took me passing out on the L that day to realise it, but I knew that I needed help.
Now, Henry is dead, and I killed him. No one can absolve you of your sins if you don't believe it in your heart, and I honestly don't believe there's any amount of good I can do in my life that'll absolve me of his death. But my trying to live a life for two people, one of whom I can never bring back, was just a recipe for disaster that was gonna doom me and everyone who cared about me.
It took this chain of events that started with me passing out in public and ended with me having that first tentative conversation with my mother about that day to realise it. And it was an interesting conversation, if uncomfortable. I found out that my mom, of course, had been dealing with a lot of the same feelings of guilt. But more illuminating, she'd been battling anxiety since the day it happened. I think we found some small amount of comfort in learning that little thing about each other.
My marriage died, but I lived on. My daughter's 13 years old now and healthy. I have an eight-year-old son, and he's healthy as an ox. I hope both of my kids grow up to be wonderful people ? the type of people who bring so much joy to everyone around them that their absence would be a tragedy, because that's the type of person Henry was.
He died 24 years ago, and it's still fresh. But I'm no longer miserable. In fact, I am well on my way to becoming one of the happiest people I know, and I think that fact would've made him happy. He also doesn't visit me in my dreams any more, and I can finally admit that I'm comfortable with never seeing his face ever again, in my dreams or otherwise. Because at the end of the day, what will an old man like me have to say to his 14-year-old friend that hasn't been said already?
? Listen to Kemp Powers read his story, The Past Wasn't Done With Me
This is an edited extract from The Moth: This Is A True Story, edited by Catherine Burns, published by Serpent's Tail at ¡Ì12.99. To order a copy for ¡Ì10.39 with free UK p&p, go to theguardian.com/bookshop or call 0330 333 6846.
Read Molly Ringwald and Neil Gaiman on why they love The Moth, plus true stories by Malcolm Gladwell, Nobel prize-winning geneticist Paul Nurse, Kimberly Reed and Elna Baker.
A senior member of the Pakistani Taliban has written an open letter to Malala Yousafzai ? the teenager shot in the head as she rode home on a school bus ? expressing regret that he didn't warn her before the attack, but claiming that she was targeted for maligning the insurgents.
Adnan Rasheed, who was convicted for his role in a 2003 assassination attempt on the country's then-president Pervez Musharraf, did not apologise for the attack, which left Malala gravely wounded, but said he found it shocking.
"I wished it would never happened [sic] and I had advised you before," he wrote.
Malala was 15 when she and two classmates were targeted by a masked gunman who picked them out on a school bus as they went home from school in Pakistan's northwest Swat valley last October.
She was seriously injured in the attack, and was flown to Britain to receive specialist treatment from doctors in Birmingham, where she and her family now live.
Last week, she celebrated her 16th birthday by delivering a defiant speech at the United Nations in New York, in which she called on world leaders to provide free schooling for all children.
In the letter, Rasheed claimed that Malala was not targeted for her efforts to promote education, but because the Taliban believed she was running a "smearing campaign" against it.
"You have said in your speech yesterday that pen is mightier than sword," Rasheed wrote, referring to Malala's UN speech, "so they attacked you for your sword not for your books or school."
The rambling four-page letter, in patchy English, citing Bertrand Russell, Henry Kissinger and historian Thomas Macaulay, was released to media organisations in Pakistan.
In it, Rasheed ? a former member of Pakistan's air force, who was among 300 prisoners to escape jail in April last year ? advises Malala to return to Pakistan, join a female Islamic seminary and advocate the cause of Islam.
He admitted that the Taliban are "blowing up" schools, but justified the attacks on the grounds that the Pakistani army and the paramilitary Frontier Corps use schools as hideouts.
Hundreds of schools have been targeted in Pakistan's north-west: activists say some had been used by the military, but many attacks were motivated by the Taliban's opposition to girls' education.
The Taliban commander also justified recent attacks in Pakistan on health workers vaccinating children against polio by claiming the west was trying to sterilise Muslims.
The letter is clearly intended to influence opinion in Pakistan: although in much of the world Malala has been hailed as a symbol of courage, at home she has been the subject of intense criticism and vilification. Online commentators have described her as a "drama queen" and even accused her of spying for the CIA.
Rasheed contrasted international support for Malala with the lack of coverage given to those killed in US drone attacks ? a source of intense grievance in Pakistan.
"If you were shot [by] Americans in a drone attack, would [the] world have ever heard updates on your medical status? ¡¦ Would you were called to UN? Would a Malala day be announced?"
Gordon Brown, now a UN special envoy on global education, said: "Nobody will believe a word the Taliban say about the right of girls like Malala to go to school until they stop burning down schools and stop massacring pupils."
A former police officer accused of killing a man in a movie theater during a dispute over texting had used his own phone to send a message to his son moments before the incident, according to documents released Thursday by Florida prosecutors.
Curtis Reeves¡¯ son, Matthew Reeves, told detectives that his father texted him at 1.04pm, 13 January, the documents show. Curtis Reeves told his son he was already seated inside the theater. Matthew Reeves, who is a Tampa police officer, made plans to meet his parents at the theater for the 1.20pm showing of Lone Survivor but was late because he stopped to wash his truck, he told detectives.
Matthew Reeves said he had walked into the dark theater while the previews were playing and looked around for his parents. It was then, investigators said, that Reeves shot 43-year-old Chad Oulson.
¡°Matthew said he did not see the shot directly, but the noise and light drew his attention to the top row of seats,¡± Pasco County Sheriff¡¯s detective Aaron Smith wrote. Matthew Reeves tried to help Oulson by pressing a stranger¡¯s T-shirt against Oulson¡¯s bleeding chest wound.
Curtis Reeves, 71, was charged with second-degree murder. He also was charged with aggravated battery; authorities say the bullet that struck and killed Oulson also struck Oulson¡¯s wife, Nicole, in the finger as she tried to shield her husband.
Reeves has pleaded not guilty to both counts. If convicted, he faces a mandatory minimum of 25 years in prison.
Reeves is being held without bail in the Pasco County Jail. His attorneys say Reeves acted in self-defense. Reeves told police that Oulson hit him in the face, possibly with a cellphone. Other witnesses, including Reeves¡¯ wife, say they never saw Oulson strike Reeves.
Reeves¡¯ attorneys did not immediately return a call for comment regarding the hundreds of pages of newly released discovery evidence documents. A judge ruled Wednesday that the documents could be released publicly.
In early February, the evidence was sealed from the public for 30 days so Reeves¡¯ attorneys could review it and perhaps challenge all or parts of its release to the public. They had no challenges Wednesday, largely because much of the information was released during a two-day bond hearing.
A chunk of the documents are from Reeves¡¯ personnel file from his decades as a Tampa police officer. Reeves regularly received outstanding evaluations and numerous letters of commendation for leadership skills and for training he led on gun safety and other topics. He retired in 1993.
The file also contains an interview with Jamira Dixon, a 35-year-old woman who said that in December, Reeves became upset with her because she was texting in the same movie theater. During the incident, she said, Reeves complained to a manager, then continued to stare at her throughout the movie and made her feel uncomfortable.
The documents also offer witness interviews of the 13 January shooting. They reveal the chaos and confusion in the theater when Oulson was shot.
Edward McFadden, 76, told Pasco county sheriff¡¯s detective Matthew Myers that he was seated in the theater and heard a loud noise behind him. ¡°He told me it sounded like a gunshot, but he wasn¡¯t sure if it was real or from the previews because they had just shown a preview for Robocop, which had a lot of gunshots in it.¡±
In the persistent, probably eternal whirlwind of conspiracy theories about the November 1963 assassination of President John F Kennedy, there is one conspiracy theory that is no longer just a theory ? and hasn¡¯t been for years.
That wide-ranging conspiracy was for real. And proof of its existence will almost certainly grow more solid on Thursday with the imminent release of tens of thousands of pages of long-classified, assassination-related documents from the National Archives ? supposedly the last of the government¡¯s secret files on Kennedy¡¯s murder.
What conspiracy? Not one involving a second assassin in Dealey Plaza. (All of the most credible evidence continues to point to Lee Harvey Oswald as the lone gunman in Dallas.) Not some sort of mafia plot that resulted in the silencing of Oswald two days later by Dallas strip-club impresario Jack Ruby. (Really, what half-way competent Mob boss would choose a delusional blabbermouth like Ruby to carry out a second Crime of the Century by murdering Oswald?) Not a sprawling coup d¡¯etat involving everyone from President Lyndon Johnson to the Pentagon architects of the Vietnam war to a cabal of gay rightwingers in New Orleans. (See Oliver Stone¡¯s hit 1991 film JFK.)
I¡¯m referring to the well-documented, proven conspiracy within the highest reaches of the US government ? a criminal conspiracy from the start, involving the destruction of top-secret documents and photographs, the silencing of witnesses and whistleblowers, and the wholesale suborning of perjury ? to cover up the truth about what the government had known in advance about Oswald and the clear threat he had posed to one man: President Kennedy.
The word ¡°cover-up¡± is not hyperbole. Remarkably enough, it is the word that the CIA itself applies to what happened immediately after the assassination. In a once-classified internal report that became public in 2014, the spy agency¡¯s in-house historian acknowledged that the CIA had engaged in a ¡°cover-up¡± (albeit a ¡°benign cover-up¡±, he insisted) to hide evidence from the Warren commission and later government investigations. The cover-up was intended to keep investigators focused exclusively on evidence that proved ¡°what the Agency believed at the time was the ¡®best truth¡¯ ? that Lee Harvey Oswald, for as yet undetermined motives, had acted alone in killing Kennedy¡±.
I certainly don¡¯t see the cover-up as benign. And in conspiring to hide evidence of their bungling before the assassination ? a conspiracy exposed document by document over the last half-century ? the CIA and FBI helped launch the much larger wave of conspiracy theories that followed and are likely to plague us forever. Since the late 1960s, opinion polls have shown consistently that a majority of the American people are convinced that the government has never told them the full truth about the murder of their president. And their skepticism, the evidence shows, has always been justified.
After falling down the rabbit hole of the national debate over the Kennedy assassination ? my first book was a history of the 9/11 commission, so I made the grievous mistake of thinking it would be easy to follow up by writing a similar history of the Warren commission ? I was saddened and surprised by a central conclusion that I reached by the end of my research: the Kennedy assassination did not have to happen. It could have been prevented ? easily ? if the CIA and FBI had just acted on the intelligence in their own files in November 1963. Yes, Oswald was a violent, delusional misfit. But he was not the pure ¡°lone wolf¡± portrayed by the initial government accounts of the assassination ? the image that the government was desperate to present after Kennedy¡¯s murder, since it suggested nothing could have been done to stop him.
In fact, both the CIA and FBI had Oswald under aggressive surveillance in the months before the assassination ? and knew he was talking to people who, at the height of the cold war, might also have wanted to see Kennedy dead.
Both agencies had strong reason to believe that Oswald, a self-proclaimed Marxist who had years of rifle practice in the Marine Corps, would be a danger when Kennedy¡¯s motorcade passed through Dallas on 22 November 1963. In what I believe was a horrifying coincidence, Oswald had just begun a new job as a laborer in a book warehouse that overlooked Dealey Plaza ? the Texas School Book Depository.
The evidence gathered by the CIA and FBI before the assassination about Oswald should have put his name in ¡°red lights¡± as a threat to Kennedy, former FBI director Clarence Kelley admitted reluctantly after his retirement. If the FBI had just acted on the information, he wrote in his own memoirs in 1987, ¡°without doubt JFK would not have died in Dallas and history would have taken a different turn¡±.
Instead, immediately after the assassination, panicked officials at both the CIA and FBI tried, desperately, to cover up evidence of the extent of their knowledge of Oswald, fearing their bungling of the intelligence about JFK¡¯s assassin might be exposed ? and that they would be blamed for the president¡¯s murder.
All of which brings us to today. It is no surprise that the CIA and FBI are, ultimately, the source of most of tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of pages, of classified documents that are scheduled to be released by the National Archives on Thursday.
From the bare-bones index of the documents provided by the archives, many of the 3,100 never-before-seen files will reveal new details about the extent of the voluminous information that the CIA and FBI gathered about Oswald in the months and years before Kennedy¡¯s death; previously declassified CIA documents show the agency was monitoring Oswald as early as 1959, the year he tried to defect to Moscow.
This week¡¯s massive government document dump, which Donald Trump has said he does not intend to block unless he sees ¡°compelling and clear¡± last-minute proof that some documents could damage national security, fulfills a deadline established under a 1992 law passed by Congress to try to stem conspiracy theories about the Kennedy assassination.
The authors of the 1992 JFK Assassination Records Collection Act said they were alarmed, in particular, by the cloud of suspicion kicked up by Stone¡¯s film, which was released the year before. Under the law, all government files related to the assassination must be released, in full, within 25 years of the law¡¯s passage ? a deadline reached this Thursday, 26 October.
Many historians and researchers, including this one, will be most intrigued to see the still-secret files that, according to the Archives index, are related to an event that was the focus of so much of the cover-up by the CIA and FBI ? Oswald¡¯s six-day trip to Mexico City just weeks before the assassination. He had apparently gone there to try to obtain a visa to defect to Cuba.
Immediately after the assassination, the CIA and FBI acknowledged they had been aware that Oswald had visited the Cuban and Soviet embassies in Mexico. But the agencies insisted they had no information to suggest that Oswald had done anything in Mexico to hint that a plot to kill Kennedy had been hatched there ? or anywhere else.
But declassified files from both agencies would become public years later that showed that, during the trip, Oswald met in Mexico with Cuban and Soviet spies, including ? incredibly enough ? a KGB assassinations expert. He appears to have had a brief affair with a Mexican woman employed at the Cuban consulate there.
Another document declassified in the 1990s: a top-secret June 1964 FBI memo prepared by its director, J Edgar Hoover, for the Warren commission that revealed that Oswald had apparently spoken openly in Mexico City of his intention to kill Kennedy.
In what appears to be another, particularly brazen part of the cover-up, that memo appears never to have reached the commission. While Hoover¡¯s memo eventually appeared in the panel¡¯s digital records at the National Archives, surviving commission staff lawyers told me for my book they never saw it during the commission¡¯s investigation in 1964. They said they would have remembered such a ¡°bombshell¡± document, and it would have prompted an urgent investigation in Mexico to determine who else heard Oswald talk about killing Kennedy ? and if anyone there had offered to help.
In Dallas, the FBI cover-up began the weekend after the president¡¯s death. The first act came on Sunday 24 November, the day Ruby gunned down Oswald at Dallas police headquarters, when an FBI agent in the bureau¡¯s field office across town was ordered to destroy a threatening handwritten note that Oswald had hand-delivered to the office earlier that month ? apparently a protest over the FBI¡¯s aggressive surveillance of his family.
What did Oswald write in the note? We¡¯ll never know, because the agent took the note into the men¡¯s room, tore it into pieces and flushed it down the toilet. Years later, the agent admitted to congressional investigators that he and his supervisor had panicked at the thought that the note would been seen as proof that that the FBI had botched the opportunity to save the president¡¯s life.
? Philip Shenon, a former Washington and foreign correspondent for the New York Times, is the author of A Cruel and Shocking Act: The Secret History of the Kennedy Assassination
? We¡¯d like your help. The JFK files will be published online on Thursday here. If you¡¯re reading through the documents and you spot an interesting fact or snippet you think we¡¯ve missed, it would be great if you could let us know. We¡¯ve set up a form here for contributions.
A murder investigation has been launched after a 52-year-old woman and her 21-year-old nephew were shot dead in north London on Thursday morning.
Paramedics from the London ambulance service called police to a road in East Finchley at 6.25am after responding to reports of two people with gunshot wounds.
An LAS spokesperson said: ¡°We sent three ambulance crews, an advanced paramedic and an incident response officer to the scene. We also dispatched London¡¯s air ambulance.¡±
Both victims were pronounced dead at the scene, Scotland Yard said. Police said there were no other injuries. Detectives from the Metropolitan police¡¯s homicide and major crime command are investigating. There have been no arrests and police are appealing for witnesses.
On Thursday afternoon, several dozen grieving relatives, friends and members of the wider Congolese community gathered by a police cordon on Elmshurst Crescent, a quiet council estate, to pay their respects to the people killed, who were named locally as Anny Basala Ekofo, a mother of nine, and Bervil Ekofo.
Francine Ekofo said she understood that her brother had been asleep when he was shot. Her aunt was shot when she answered the door to the killers, she said, adding that it was a case of mistaken identity.
¡°Apparently one of the family members was looking for somewhere to stay for the next few nights, because he knew something was going to happen,¡± she said, adding that this person had then disappeared. ¡°A couple of days after that, this happened.¡±
Francine Ekofo said her brother, a second-year psychology student at the University of West London, had never been in trouble, ¡°not even in school¡±. Bervil Ekofo¡¯s mother, Maymie Botanba, was also among the mourners by the cordon. ¡°Where¡¯s my son? Where¡¯s my Bervil? Where¡¯s my best friend,¡± she cried.
A family friend among the mourners, who preferred not to be named, said Bervil Ekofo had been visiting his aunt and cousins when he was killed. The rest of the family were at the police station on Thursday, answering questions, she said. It is unclear how many people were at the property at the time.
¡°Bervil was not the target. Bervil just came to see them and unfortunately that¡¯s what happened, but I really don¡¯t know the rest,¡± she said. Many other family members were at home at the time, she said, most of whom had been taken to the police station, although others may have been in hospital. ¡°Bervil¡¯s dad, he¡¯s in pieces, he can¡¯t even talk,¡± she added.
Catherine Moffitt, 56, a neighbour, described what she saw just before 6.30am. ¡°About 12 cars were down this morning, about two ambulances, police running down the road with their blue gloves on. Some people did hear gunshots, but I didn¡¯t,¡± she said.
¡°I thought we were under siege, I really did. This has never happened down this road, it¡¯s a lovely, little, quiet estate.¡±
Throughout the day, mourners sat or stood near the cordon, talking, crying and comforting one another. Another family friend, who gave his name as Dominic, said Anny Basala Ekofo would have been getting ready to go shopping at the market, as she did every Thursday.
Esperance Luhymber, 50, said Anny Basala Ekofo, who had seven sons and two daughters, came to live in Britain 26 years ago. ¡°She was a very, very nice lady,¡± she said. ¡°Calm, doesn¡¯t talk too much.¡±
At 3pm, news spread among those assembled that the coroner had arrived to take away the bodies of the victims. They gathered at the edge of the cordon as the plain, black van pulled up to the entrance to the block.
Before officials could begin their work, Anny Basala Ekofo¡¯s sister and Botanba rushed through the cordon to try to get closer to their loved ones, only to be intercepted by police.
¡°Basala, Basala, wake up,¡± cried her sister. More family members came forward to comfort them as officers formed a line to prevent the mourners from advancing any further.
The crowd stayed to watch as the bodies were taken from the block. Asked why they remained, Bridget Lita, 50, who grew up in the same village as Anny Basala Ekofo in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, said: ¡°It¡¯s our culture. To us, she¡¯s our sister.¡±
Police have launched a murder investigation after a man in his 30s was found dead at a private party in Surrey.
Police were called to the property in Church Lane, Headley, where several other people are believed to have suffered serious injuries, just after 2.30am on Monday.
Anne Leguen de Lacroix, a Church Lane resident and parish clerk, said she thought she heard a sound like a gunshot. ¡°I believe I heard something that sounded like a shot but I can¡¯t be 100% sure,¡± she said. ¡°People began to turn up around 11pm. It was a rave-style party, they had a DJ in the garden.
¡°They were playing rap music. Girls were dressed in bikinis, I suppose it was intended as a pool party. At about 2.30am we looked out of the window and everybody was trying to get out as quickly as they could. It was mayhem as it¡¯s a typical narrow country lane.¡±
The party followed a similar event at the same property last year that disturbed neighbours. As a result they had raised concerns about Sunday night¡¯s event but had been told it had a licence until 4am, Leguen de Lacroix said.
She said the event was ticketed and had bouncers. ¡°It¡¯s unbelievable that such a small village could host such a big party,¡± she said. ¡°There were about 450 people, as many in the whole village.¡±Sky News showed the advertisement for the party, describing it as ¡°The Big Mansion Pool Party Called My League¡±.
David Preedy, the chair of Headley parish council, said he had asked police to contact the organisers on Sunday night because he feared a repeat of what he described as ¡°anti-social behaviour¡± at last year¡¯s event.
¡°I didn¡¯t in my worst nightmares think something like this would happen,¡± he said. ¡°People are very shocked and upset by it.¡±
He said he understood that tenants lived in the house and this was the second big party they had held.
¡°It didn¡¯t involve residents as far as I could tell,¡± he said. ¡°I drove past and the pub car park was pretty much full, with about 50 cars.¡± Preedy said police had told him the road was likely be closed for hours and possibly for the remainder of Monday.
Surrey police said no arrests had been made but that they were pursuing a number of lines of inquiry. They appealed for anyone who was at the party to come forward.
A spokesman said: ¡°Police and ambulance crews quickly attended the location and found the body of the man, who was subsequently declared dead at the scene. The man has not yet been formally identified and a postmortem examination to establish the cause of death will take place in due course.¡±
Three men have been charged with the murder of a company executive who was fatally shot, allegedly during a botched burglary.
Guy Hedger, 61, was killed in the early hours of 30 April after at least two intruders entered his house in Castlewood, Dorset.
Jason Baccus, 41, and Scott Keeping, 44, both from Bournemouth, were charged with murder and aggravated burglary on Friday, Dorset police said. They are due to appear at Bournemouth magistrates court on Saturday. A third man, Kevin Downton, 40, from Winterborne Stickland, Dorset, was also charged with murder and aggravated burglary later on Friday, Dorset police said.
A postmortem examination found Hedger died as a consequence of gunshot wounds, the force said.The alarm was raised at 3.03am on 30 April when police received a call reporting Hedger had been shot with a shotgun. He was pronounced dead shortly after arriving at hospital.
Hedger¡¯s partner, Simon-Pierre Hedger-Cooper, was also in the house at the time.Earlier this week, Hedger¡¯s family paid tribute and said: ¡°Guy was a caring and compassionate partner, son, brother and uncle who lived life to its full and enriched the lives of all those who knew him. Guy will be sorely missed by family, friends and colleagues, but he will live in our hearts forever.¡±
Hedger was a director of the Avonbourne International Business and Enterprise Trust, which runs colleges and a primary school in the Bournemouth area.Police said a 40-year-old Bournemouth woman and a 40-year-old man from the Blandford area were still being questioned by detectives.Det Supt Kevin Connolly said: ¡°Family liaison officers have updated Guy¡¯s family with this development and our thoughts are with them at this difficult time.¡±He added: ¡°Even though two men have been charged, DCI Sarah Derbyshire, head of the major crime team, continues to lead the investigation and any witnesses who are yet to speak with officers are asked to contact Dorset police.¡°There will continue to be a heightened police presence in the area while enquiries take place and our local policing team is there for residents, should they have any concerns.¡±
Anyone with information is asked to contact Dorset police via email at 101@dorset.pnn.police.uk or by calling 101, quoting incident number 30:53. Alternatively contact Crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555111 or via www.crimestoppers-uk.org.
One policeman has been killed and two wounded in a shooting incident in central Paris, days before the first round of the French presidential election.
Pierre-Henry Brandet, of the French interior ministry, said the attacker opened fire on a police van on the Champs Elysees on Thursday night, killing one officer and seriously wounding two others. He said later that the wounded police officers¡¯ lives were no longer in danger.
At about 9pm the man drove a car up to a parked police van full of officers. He got out of the car and fired an automatic weapon, killing one officer in the van, before shooting at others who were standing on the nearby pavement, injuring two before he was shot dead by police.
The French president, Francois Hollande, said the Champs Elysees attack was ¡°terrorist in nature¡± and promised ¡°utmost vigilance¡± by security services to ensure security around the presidential election. He has called a defence council meeting for 8am on Friday.
Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack in a statement by the jihadi group¡¯s propaganda agency Amaq. According to AFP, the statement said the attacker was one of the group¡¯s ¡°fighters¡± known as Abu Yussef, ¡°the Belgian¡±. The statement offered no evidence to support the claim.
France¡¯s anti-terrorism prosecutor Francois Molins said that security officials had verified the attacker¡¯s identity, although he did not release the name. Molins said that investigators were trying to determine whether the attacker had any accomplices.
Citing sources close to the inquiry, AFP said he was a 39-year-old who had been under investigation by anti-terrorist officers for having shown an intention to kill police. A police search was carried out at a home in Seine-et-Marne outside Paris.
AFP, Le Parisien and other news outlets reported that the attacker had been jailed in 2005 for the attempted murder of three police officers.
Authorities closed the Champs Elysees and the surrounding streets and called on the public to avoid the area, as a police helicopter flew low over central Paris.
A police source told AFP a tourist had been ¡°slightly injured¡± by a shard of bullet that struck her knee during the shooting.
Choukri Chouanine, the owner of a restaurant on the nearby rue de Ponthieu, told AFP that he had heard a short round of ¡°a lot of gunfire¡±. ¡°We had to hide our diners in the basement,¡± he said.
A witness who did not want to give his name said he had been 10 metres from the shooting. ¡°We heard shots like a firecracker and we saw an attack on police, we turned and fled.¡±
One woman said there had been ¡°panic¡± at Franklin D Roosevelt metro station nearby. ¡°People were running in all directions.¡±
A witness identified only as Ines told French television station BFM that she heard shooting and saw a man¡¯s body on the ground, and that the area was quickly evacuated by police.
The shooting was said to have happened in the area near the Marks & Spencer shop on the Champs Elysees.
The US president, Donald Trump, reacted to the news during a joint press conference with the Italian prime minister, Paolo Gentiloni, at the White House. ¡°First of all, our condolences from our country to the people of France,¡± he said. ¡°Again, it¡¯s happening, it seems. I just saw it as I was walking in, so that¡¯s a terrible thing.
¡°It¡¯s a very, very terrible thing that¡¯s going on in the world today. But it looks like another terrorist attack and what can you say? It just never ends. We have to be strong and we have to be vigilant and I¡¯ve been saying it for a long time.¡±
The incident comes days before the first round of the French presidential election. Security had already been stepped up at political rallies this week after the arrest of two men on Tuesday suspected of plotting an ¡°imminent and violent attack¡± in the run-up to Sunday¡¯s vote.
There was no information on whether or not the Paris incident was linked in any way to the arrests earlier this week.
Officials said the men who had been arrested on Tuesday were seeking to ¡°have an impact in this [electoral] period¡± and had amassed an arsenal of weapons and bomb-making equipment, including 3kg of homemade explosive found in the flat where they were staying.
On Wednesday, the Paris anti-terror court had opened a preliminary investigation into one of the suspects, Mahiedine Merabet, 29, on 5 April, after receiving a tip-off from British intelligence that he had tried to make contact with Isis in order to send them a video expressing his support for the terrorist group.
Conflicting accounts of the injuries that led to Mr Chadwick's death emerged at the inquest in Oxford. In a written statement, an American doctor said that he believed the cause of death was a blow to the head, while a Home Office pathologist determined that it was a gunshot wound.
Mr Chadwick was working as a close protection officer for London-based ArmorGroup when he died in an incident while drinking whisky with two of his colleagues, James Booker and Julian McCloskey.
Mr Booker told the inquest that he believed Mr Chadwick had accidentally shot himself while trying to clear his Glock 9mm pistol, while Mr McCloskey said he saw him put the gun to his neck area and pull the trigger, on the night of October 11 2004 in Taza, near Kirkuk in northern Iraq.
ArmorGroup bans drinking among its staff but Mr McCloskey sent a "slurred" message over the radio requesting medical help following the incident.
Ms Lynch said it was possible that, having been warned by one of his two drinking partners not to mess around with his gun, he had pulled the trigger to show the gun was not loaded. But he may not have known, she said, that because he had not entirely removed the gun magazine, the pistol could still load.
"Having been pulled up by his senior colleague, he wanted to demonstrate that the gun was safe," Ms Lynch said.
She didn't believe that Mr Chadwick had been killed by one of his drinking partners. "I don't believe that happened and there is no evidence that it happened. Mr Chadwick shot himself and of that I'm in no doubt whatsoever."
She said Mr McCloskey's strange behaviour, which saw him kick Mr Chadwick as he lay bleeding on the floor, could be attributed to shock.
"He had just seen a young friend and colleague suffer a terrible injury in the strangest and most shocking of manners," Ms Lynch said.
She acknowledged that events surrounding the death, and the varying accounts, some of which suggested suspicious circumstances, were "bizarre" but said much of this could be put down to the shock of what happened and the involvement of alcohol. Lieutenant Colonel Donald Reed, of the US army forward surgical team, had reported that he believed Mr Chadwick's injury did not fit with the accounts given.
He considered that he had been killed by a blow to the head with a blunt object, and raised suspicions about the ArmorGroup staff who brought him to hospital - although Mr McCluskey or Mr Booker were not among them - saying they were "disinterested".
"The group of colleagues in attendance at the time I was treating Paul, I felt, had a callous disregard for their colleague," he said.
"Paul's colleagues didn't show the normal extreme grief, but appeared quite disinterested."
Lt Col Reed said he found no gunshot residue around the injury, no bullet exit wound and no bullet in his head. Another witness explained that the bullet was later found in the ceiling of the room where the incident happened.
A Home Office pathologist discounted Lt Col Reed's evidence, saying that the fatal injury was a gunshot wound and there was no sign of any other injury.
Ms Lynch said: "Matters got worse because of Lt Col Reed's opinion and the rumour mill that will have been gathering pace at the camp in the following days will have been very unpleasant for everyone. There was never any overt action but Mr Booker and Mr McCloskey were treated as suspects and sacked."
Detective inspector Stan Nieburg, of Thames Valley police, investigated the incident after Mr Chadwick's body was flown back to RAF Brize Norton near Oxford. He found no suspicious circumstances surrounding the death.
Mr Chadwick was a keen judo player who had won several titles. He joined the marines at 16 and had "excellent rifle skills", was a qualified fitness instructor and had plans to go to university in Japan to study martial arts.
David King, 32, was hit by five of a burst of 26 bullets fired from an AK-47 assault rifle as he emerged from the Physical Limit gym in Hoddesdon in Hertfordshire in October 2003.
It is thought that the drive-by shooting by a masked man in a stolen Peugeot van was the first time an automatic weapon had been fired in a crime in Britain, let alone used to kill.
Yesterday, the gunman, Roger Vincent, 33, of Penn in Buckinghamshire, was told he would serve a life sentence of at least 30 years after he was unanimously convicted of murder at Luton crown court.
His driver, David Smith, also 33, from Elstree in Hertfordshire, was sentenced to a minimum of 25 years.
Jailing the pair, Mr Justice Wilkie said: "This was a thoroughly planned, ruthless and brutally executed assassination ... it was only by great fortune no other passersby were seriously injured or worse."
A third defendant, Julian Elfes, 38, of High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, was jailed for five years for helping Vincent lie low after the shooting.
A fourth, Jason Attridge, of Harrow in north London, was cleared of murder.
The trial lasted seven weeks, and followed a Hertfordshire police investigation which tracked more than 100,000 mobile phone calls and took 1,200 witness statements. Officers were able to trace the defendants' movements in the days before the shooting, and to catch them discussing the attack over the phone.
Outside court, Detective Inspector Paul Maghie said the success of his team's "painstaking" investigation was down to "old fashioned detective skills".
The court was told that King, who lived with his partner and their two children in Stevenage, Hertfordshire, had been charged, but later released, when a 14kg (30lb) shipment of heroin was intercepted by customs officers - causing rumours among his criminal associates that he had become a police informer.
A contract was taken out.
The first gunman, Dean Spencer, 31, had lost his nerve when he saw King's sheer size, the court heard. He has since pleaded guilty to conspiracy to murder, and will be sentenced later.
Two weeks later, Vincent and Smith killed King as he came out of the Hoddesdon gym early in the morning; King's friend, Ian Crocker, who was with him in the gym, was also shot and injured.
He later gave evidence in Vincent's defence.
Det Insp Maghie said of King's killing with the Kalashnikov AK-47: "Clearly he was a criminal - but he had children, he had a wife and family, and we wanted justice for them.
"This is the first time that weapon was used in Britain in automatic mode - thankfully, by the grace of God no one else was injured."
The officer sought to reassure the residents of Hoddesdon, a small market town within the capital's affluent commuter belt, that there was unlikely to be a recurrence of the dramatic shooting: "Dave King was in Hoddesdon, that is why the weapon was taken there. There is no other link."
Scientific evidence which helped convict Barry George of the murder of the BBC presenter Jill Dando six years ago has since been codified by the government's Forensic Science Service as "of no value", the Guardian understands.
The guidance on the evidence, a speck of firearms residue found deep in the pocket of George's coat, was circulated internally by the Forensic Science Service early last year in a paper on gunshot residue.
The paper was seized upon by lawyers at the Criminal Cases Review Commission who have spent five years examining various theories in the George case.
It is the scientists' opinion that single speck ballistics evidence is of no value which formed the basis of yesterday's decision by the review commission to refer the case to the court of appeal, where George's lawyers will argue the murder conviction must be quashed as unsafe.
The Crown Prosecution Service said yesterday it was examining the evidence. It is understood the CPS and the Metropolitan police will contest the appeal, which is likely to be heard this year.
If the appeal succeeds a decision will be made on whether a retrial would be possible so long after the murder.
George's solicitor Jeremy Moore said he and his client were "very pleased" by the decision and commended the review commission for its "extremely thorough and careful approach" to the case.
Mr Moore said: "We hope finally to persuade the court of appeal that the verdict in this case was clearly unsafe. Mr George has now spent seven extremely difficult years in custody for a conviction which ... will be seen as one of the gravest miscarriages of justice of recent years."
George, 47, was convicted in July 2001 of murdering Dando on the doorstep of her home in Fulham, west London, on April 26 1999. The BBC presenter was shot in the head. No weapon was ever found, there were no eyewitnesses and no motive was presented.
George, who used several different aliases, including Barry Bulsara, the real name of Freddie Mercury from Queen, had a variety of personality disorders. He was presented as a fantasist who stalked and photographed hundreds of women.
George was arrested 13 months after the murder when a review by the police murder squad team of outstanding names in the system flagged him up.
It emerged later that the police were given information which pointed out George as a potential suspect in May and June 1999, just weeks after the murder. Nothing was done with this information until eight months later.
A picture found by police in George's flat in April 2000 showed him brandishing a modified handgun, similar to that used to kill Dando, a weapon which was never found.
A scientist discovered a speck of firearms residue deep in the pocket of the black Cecil Gee coat a month later - more than a year after the murder.
Doubt was cast on the significance of the residue at George's trial and the judge warned the jury against viewing it alone as significant. The jury convicted by 10:1, and a year later George lost his first appeal.
Over the last five years lawyers from the Criminal Cases Review Commission have examined and dismissed more than 17 potential grounds for appeal, including the claim that a Serbian hitman killed the BBC presenter. Graham Zellick, chairman of the CCRC, said too much weight had been placed on the residue evidence. "The particle was found a year later, it was found in a pocket and was such a small speck it could not be seen," he said. "The consensus view now is that in those circumstances for a whole variety of reasons you can infer virtually nothing from that. It neither points to guilt or innocence, it is neutral.
"Our investigation of this case could not have been more thorough or intensive."
It is understood, however, that a review by Strathclyde police of the ballistics evidence found that there was no dispute that it was firearms discharge residue and that it was also consistent with that found on the bullet wound and the cartridge case at the scene.
Presenter Nick Ross, a former colleague of Dando's, said yesterday he "rather expected" the appeal to be granted. Of the firearms evidence he said: "I thought it was the most irrelevant piece of evidence of the lot."
But he said there were large amounts of other evidence that pointed to George as the murderer, such as witness statements.
Dando was 37 and anticipating her forthcoming marriage when she died. After joking to friends she would end up as the career woman who turns around at 40 and says, "Oh God, I forgot to get married and have children," she became engaged to gynaecologist Alan Farthing in 1999.
She was wearing the ¡Ì20,000 solitaire diamond engagement ring he gave her when she was shot.
In interviews after her death he said: "Jill believed everyone was fundamentally the same, and treated everyone the same."
April 26 1999: Jill Dando, the 37-year-old television presenter, is shot dead with a single bullet to the head on the steps of her home in Fulham, south-west London.
May 25 2000: Police arrest Barry George, also known as Barry Bulsara, following surveillance of his home.
July 2 2001: A jury finds George guilty of murder. He is later sentenced to life imprisonment.
July 29 2002: George loses appeal against conviction at court of appeal in London. Three judges rejected his claim that his conviction was "unsafe".
December 16 2002: House of Lords refuses permission for George to mount a further challenge to his conviction.
March 25 2006: It emerges that lawyers for George have submitted new evidence to the CCRC which they believe undermines the safety of his conviction. They say they have new medical evidence which suggests George's mental problems would have made him incapable of carrying out the crime, and that new witnesses who were not heard at the original trial may provide an explanation for why a particle of gunshot residue was found on his coat.
The gunman who carried out a massacre at a small-town Texas church on Sunday was involved in a family dispute, authorities said. Twenty-six people were killed and 20 wounded in the shooting, which took place during a Sunday morning service.
¡°There was a domestic situation going on,¡± Freeman Martin, a spokesman for the Texas department of public safety, said at a press conference on Monday near the scene of the shooting in Sutherland Springs, about 35 miles east of San Antonio.
Martin said the named gunman, Devin Kelley, sent threatening texts to his mother-in-law. She had attended the First Baptist church in the past but was not there on Sunday.
¡°He expressed anger towards his mother-in-law,¡± Martin said. ¡°This was not racially motivated, it wasn¡¯t over religious beliefs.¡±
Of the deceased, 23 died in the church, two outside and one in hospital, Martin said. Among the 20 wounded, six were in stable condition or released, four in serious condition and 10 critical. The youngest to die was aged 18 months; the oldest was 77.
Martin said the 26-year-old Kelley, who lived in New Braunfels, about 35 miles north of Sutherland Springs, was ¡°engaged¡± by a civilian with an AR rifle ? a ¡°Texas hero¡±, he said ? who flagged down a motorist, jumped in his vehicle and chased Kelley, who was found dead in his SUV.
Martin said the suspect made a call on a cellphone to tell his father he had been shot and did not think he was going to make it.
Later, in an evening briefing, Martin said that an autopsy on the shooter¡¯s body had found three gunshot wounds ? two from the armed citizen, one in the leg and one in the torso ? and a third in the head, consistent with being self-inflicted.
At least 15 magazines with a 30-round capacity have been recovered from the scene, the spokesman said. The evidence collection process is expected to be finished on Monday night, with forensic mapping and trajectory analysis to take place on Tuesday.
Chris Combs, an FBI special agent, said that of the four gun purchases made by the shooter, in each background check of three databases ¡°there was not information that we would have said was prohibitive for that man to get the firearm¡±.
Three guns belonging to Kelley were recovered: a Ruger rifle, a black 9mm handgun and Ruger 22 pistol were found in his vehicle, Fred Milanowski, a Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) agent said. He also in the past had purchased another gun. Two were bought in Colorado and two in Texas, one per year from 2014 to 2017.
Authorities said there was video footage of the shooting from inside the church, which typically broadcast its services on YouTube. Kelley, dressed in all black and wearing a mask with a white skull face and a ballistic vest with a protective plate on the front, first attracted attention moments before the shooting when he was spotted at a gas station a block away from the church.
A US air force spokeswoman earlier told reporters Kelley had been in the air force and worked in logistics at a base in New Mexico. He was court-martialed in 2012 and sentenced to a year in military prison for ¡°assault on his spouse and child¡± and received a bad conduct discharge in 2014.
It was revealed on Monday that the air force did not enter the record of Kelley¡¯s domestic abuse conviction into the national background check system, which, according to an air force spokesperson, would have prohibited him from buying or owning firearms.
Kelley was not licensed to carry a firearm openly or in a concealed fashion in public in Texas. But he did have an unarmed private security license ¡°similar to a security guard at a concert¡±, Martin said. That meant he passed criminal background and fingerprint checks.
Kelley was employed as a night-time security guard at a New Braunfels water park over the summer and had a job in security at an RV resort at the time of the shooting, the San Antonio Express-News reported. The resort manager told the newspaper Kelley had passed a background check and was hired about six weeks ago but left work on Saturday ¡°saying he had a headache¡± and did not show up the next day.
The pastor of First Baptist church, Frank Pomeroy, and his wife, Sherri, addressed reporters on Monday. They were away when the shooting happened. Their 14-year-old daughter, Annabelle, was killed.
¡°You lean in to what you don¡¯t understand, you lean in to the Lord,¡± Frank Pomeroy said. ¡°I don¡¯t understand but I know my God does.¡±
Sherri Pomeroy said: ¡°We lost more than Belle yesterday and one thing that gives me a sliver of encouragement is the fact that Belle was surrounded yesterday by her church family that she loved fiercely and vice-versa.
¡°Our church was not comprised of members or parishioners. We were a very close family, we ate together, we laughed together, we cried together and we worshipped together. Now most of our church family is gone, our building is probably beyond repair and the few of us that are left behind lost tragically yesterday.¡±
All the bodies had been removed from the church by Monday morning. The vicinity of the church remained closed off to the public as officials from multiple law enforcement agencies combed the area.
Francis Alviso, who lives nearby, arrived at a community centre that has served as a gathering point for friends and relatives of the victims, offering help. He used to go to garage sales in Sutherland Springs, he said.
¡°When you don¡¯t have enough money to buy, they¡¯re just like, ¡®That¡¯s OK, take it,¡¯ the 59-year-old said. ¡°That¡¯s how great people are. They would help others.
¡°This is a small community, I never thought it would happen somewhere like that. I live in a town like this. Tomorrow, next day, it could happen in my town.¡±
Dana Fletcher said she had been here for a joyous event only a week earlier: the annual Old Town Day celebration.
¡°Thank God it wasn¡¯t last weekend, we had our family here,¡± she said.
Before any of the baby-boom martyrs - Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, Marilyn Monroe, Elvis - there was George Reeves, TV's first Superman, dead by his own hand in June 1959. To a generation of children raised on his exploits, leaping tall buildings and out running speeding bullets, the notion that Superman should have killed himself was inconceivable - and perhaps it was.
The house where Reeves died stands a short distance up Benedict Canyon Drive, in the dense hills and narrow, meandering lanes north of Sunset Boulevard. The canyon's denizens have included Rudolph Valentino, Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks, Marion Davies, Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton, and Pia Zadora. Within a mile is Cielo Drive, where Charles Manson's robots massacred Sharon Tate and friends in August 1969. In the mid-1990s, Heidi Fleiss ran her string of escorts from a well-concealed house some way to the north. And up on secluded Beverly Crest Drive, Rock Hudson for decades enjoyed his exclusively gay off-screen private life, hosting allmale Sunday parties around his pool, until Aids caught hold of him and he was forced to endure his last few days on earth beneath the thunderous churning blades of news helicopters circling overhead.
Compared with these giants, George Reeves was pretty small beer, a cardboard star in the upstart new medium of television. Number 1579 Benedict Canyon Drive was similarly small-scale, a modest house, just three rooms downstairs and a bedroom and bathroom in the attic. It was bought for Reeves in 1950 by his longtime lover Toni Mannix, who was married to the powerful MGM studio enforcer Eddie Mannix. And here his body was found, in the early morning of June 16 1959, while his fiancee, Leonore Lemmon, reputedly a headline-hungry gold digger, sat downstairs with a house guest called Robert Condon and two neighbours, all of them stupefied with drink when the cops arrived.
In the windowless upstairs bedroom, Reeves lay naked on the bed in a pool of blood, a gun between his feet, a shell casing beneath his corpse, a bullet in his brain and a thick spray of his gore stretching up the wall to the slanted ceiling.
An open-and-shut case of suicide, said the LA police and the coroner, before closing the investigation with what some considered indecent haste. The news papers were in a frenzy for a week, then dropped the story flat. But among the dead man's friends there were many who called it murder, and there was no shortage of suspects or motives. The case has never been reopened, but the doubts have never been satisfactorily laid to rest.
Hollywoodland, a new film directed by Allen Coulter, attempts to unravel the many skeins of suspicion and uncertainty surrounding Reeves' death, and does a good job of sketching in the three or four principal theories. Unlike Brian De Palma's superficially similar The Black Dahlia, set a decade earlier than Hollywoodland, Coulter's movie has a remarkably confi dent feel for Los Angeles of the 1950s as a living era and a vivid locale. Reeves was a has-been seeking a comeback, so there is piquancy to the choice of Ben Affleck, a movie star with a career in crisis, to play the stumbling superhero .
As with the many theories that swirl around the unsolved murder of Elizabeth Short - the tortured and mutilated Black Dahlia - there are too many contradictory pieces to assemble a single coherent jigsaw puzzle of Reeves' death/murder. Or rather, there are perhaps three jigsaws with not enough pieces to complete any of them. On the night Reeves died, he and Lemmon, the woman for whom he'd dumped Mannix, had gone out to dinner and many drinks, leaving Condon in the house; they returned at about 11pm. Reeves went to bed alone around midnight, but came down in an irritable mood an hour later when Condon's lover, Carol Van Ronkel, a married neighbour, showed up with one William Bliss, who lived nearby but was hardly known to the others. Condon later said that Reeves apologised for his bad mood and returned upstairs. Then, according to the police report, Lemmon said, "He is going to shoot himself," whereupon, through the thin ceiling, they heard a bedside drawer open. "He is getting the gun out now and he is going to shoot himself," Lemmon continued and, sure enough, a shot rang out. Bliss ran upstairs and found Reeves dead on the bed.
At least, this is how the four very drunk witnesses said it went down in perfunctory police interviews conducted before they scattered into the night. In the week-long investigation that followed, the evidence seal on the property was broken, apparently by Lemmon, who absconded to New York, never to return, with $4,000 in travellers' cheques. Reeves had supposedly bought the cheques for a "honeymoon" that only Lemmon seemed to know about. The coroner's autopsy took place only after the corpse had been thoroughly washed. It failed to test for powder traces on Reeves' hand and, even though the top of Reeves' skull was removed, no one checked the head wound for gunpowder traces, which would have been present if he'd shot himself at close range. Nothing explained the bruises on the corpse's face and chest. Reeves showed no signs of a suicidal demeanour, left no note and died naked - extremely unusual for a suicide.
None of his friends could believe that Reeves, a glad-handing, straight-shooting, life-loving guy, had a plausible reason to do away with himself . Only his Superman co-star Jack Larson, who played cub reporter Jimmy Olsen, accepted the verdict, "because he made such a mess of things" - that is, forsaking his beloved patroness at a time when his career was apparently in ruins.
Years later, another cast member, Phyllis Coates, who played Lois Lane, told Sam Kashner and Nancy Schoenberger, authors of Hollywood Kryptonite, an often speculative examination of the case, that she had received a very disturbing phone call at 4.30am on the morning of Reeves' death. It came from Toni Mannix, beside herself with anxiety. "She was hyperventilating and ranting," recalled Coates. "She said, 'The boy is dead. He's been murdered.' " Mannix was about the only break Reeves ever got in Hollywood. She was his refuge, his financial salvation, his soulmate, his keeper and the boon companion of his happiest years.
Reeves grew up mainly in Pasadena with his overbearing and possessive mother Helen, who gave George the name of her second husband, one Mr Bessolo. (Jack Warner gave him the marquee-friendly name he was buried with.) By 1937, George fetched up at the Pasadena Playhouse, incubator of many a movie star. Handsome in that strapping, jutjawed manner that slayed the ladies of the Depression, he was signed to Warners, and then to Paramount, which leased him out to play one of the Tarleton twins in Gone With The Wind. It was a fabulous opportunity but it came to nothing, perhap s because of the ineff ectual role, or the orange dye-job he was forced to sport ("It was tangerine ..." Affleck avers in Hollywoodland).
The war interrupted Reeves' ascent, though he caught some attention in 1943's flagwaver So Proudly We Hail. Its director, Mark Sandrich, said he had great plans for George once the war was over, but died before anything could come of his promise. By 1951, Reeves was reduced to walk-on parts in studio dross. There was a recession ; the studios were retrenching, ditching even their big-name stars to save money. Groomed for stardom in the prosperous early 40s, Reeves had every reason to believe he was now in the wrong line of business. And then Toni Mannix took him under her finely plumed wing, and everything changed.
Born in 1906, Toni was eight years George's senior, a spirited, vivacious ex-Ziegfeld Girl. She had been Eddie Mannix's mistress for years and had only recently married him when she met George, then at his lowest ebb. Not that Eddie Mannix was overly worried about George and Toni. The MGM casting couches gave him access to any woman he wanted, his fearsome reputation more than compensating for his Frog Prince cast of feature and gruff demeanour. He and his own mistresses often went on double dates with George and Toni, and when they travelled it was Mannixes in first class, sexual playthings in coach.
There was a whiff of Joe Gillis and Norma Desmond about George and Toni's relationship, except that he wasn't a cynic and she wasn't demented. Hollywoodland deftly notes the Sunset Boulevard connection in a scene of the dead Reeves on the mortuary table (Sunset Boulevard's scrapped original opening had William Holden introducing himself postmortem from the slab) intercut with a glimpse of Billy Wilder, Boulevard's director, in a nightclub. Toni probably had Sunset Boulevard in mind when she, like Norma Desmond, gave George a pocketwatch inscribed with the legend "Mad About The Boy". And he was a very kept boy - house, car, clothes, furniture, vacations: Toni Mannix owned George Reeves, lock, stock and barrel-chest. But it was a loving relationship conducted in the full expectation of marriage once the ailing Eddie finally succumbed to one of his frequent heart attacks. Their house on Benedict Canyon Drive was always full of their friends, the drink flowed freely from breakfast-time onwards, and even Eddie was known to show up and grunt his way through the occasional barbecue.
In 1951, Reeves reluctantly agreed to don the Superman costume for a feature-length TV pilot called Superman And The Mole Men, and afterwards the team shot 13 half-hour Superman episodes, even though no network was yet interested. They would languish in the can for two years, during which time Reeves appeared in Fred Zinnemann's From Here To Eternity, a surefire hit, just like Gone With The Wind. By the time Eternity was released, however, Superman had aired and Reeves was suddenly a bona-fide superhero among apple-cheeked boy scouts and suburban tykes in cowboy outfits. Audiences at the From Here To Eternity previews shouted out, "There's Superman!" and Reeves knew his career as a serious actor was in trouble.
When they were first aired in 1953, the Adventures Of Superman made as great an impact as Elvis and Little Richard would a couple of years later. Reeves found himself the object of a kind of proto-Beatlemania, facing riotous crowds 20,000-strong at department store openings and celebrity galas, fending off kids who jabbed him with pins, punched him in the stomach and, on one queasy occasion, even aimed a loaded .38 at the Man of Steel.
Superman did Reeves' career all the wrong favours. Actors in the series could work on other projects for only a month at a time, which meant careers couldn't be developed - $2,500 a week for 13 weeks was a good enough wage, but not if it had to last 52 weeks. Worst of all, Reeves had been typecast in the worst way: he had Boris Karloff 's problem but none of his money. Little wonder Reeves burned his Superman outfit at the end of every season.
In early 1959, after a decade together, Reeves left Toni Mannix for Leonore Lemmon, a nightclub hellion who had been a staple of the gossip columns since eloping with a penniless sprig of the Vanderbilt dynasty in 1941. For the now visibly ageing Toni, it was a mighty blow. George was her shining prize, she had built him from the ground up, and without him she felt doomed to a life of waiting for Eddie Mannix to die, something that seemed to be taking a very long time. She sequestered herself at home, cried for weeks, and phoned George up to 20 times a day. The film offers a glimpse of Toni's famous temper and backstage mouth: "Does she blow smoke rings with her cunt?" she screams, before threatening : "I'll tell them you're a Red and a fag and a lush!" She was so inconsolable her friends worried for her health. This is the basis for one of the alter native theories to explain Reeves's death.
Eddie Mannix may have been ailing, but he had minions at hand to do his bidding, even from his sickbed. He'd grown up with Bugsy Siegel and a lot of Irish and Jewish wiseguys back around New Jersey's Palisades Park. He had ties with an LA mobster and the chief of police. And for all his philandering, Eddie was devoted to his wife. Mess with her, and you had to deal with him, too.
In The Fixers, his account of the strong-arm reign of Mannix at MGM, EJ Fleming details the scandals that Mannix made disappear for Louis B Mayer and his wayward employees: reckless affairs, drunk-driving busts, wife beatings, drug arrests and union beefs. Mannix was thought by many to have had his uncooperative first wife killed in 1937, when her car was run off the road near a nightspot owned by one of Mannix's unsavoury pals. If strong-arm men were needed to seek vengeance for the aggrieved Toni, Eddie Mannix had them on retainer.
But did he ever use them? Did Toni have access to them? Kashner and Schoenberger theorise that William Bliss - perhaps, and for unknown reasons - distracted the revellers on the night of Reeves' death, permitting a second man to get upstairs and kill Reeves. The relative inaccessibility of the bedroom seems to make this unlikely, unless the witnesses downstairs were scared into silence by the time the police arrived. This might also explain Toni's otherwise inexplicable small-hours call to Phyllis Coates.
In 1999, Beverly Hills publicist Edward Lozzi claimed on the tabloid-TV show Extra that before her death a bedridden Toni had confessed to her priest, while Lozzi was present, that she had had George killed. Lozzi said that none of the thugs who worked for Eddie Mannix were alive any more and he now felt safe to talk. Recently he told the LA Times Toni had confessed "because she was absolutely terrified of going to hell". Again, her confession provides no practical explanation of how the TV star was killed with a house full of witnesses.
Other mysterious bullet holes were found in the house. Two were in the floor, with one bullet lodged in the wall of the downstairs living room. Lemmon claimed they'd got there after she fired the gun in an argument with Reeves. Lemmon's volatile nature and Vesuvian temper tantrums have long made her a prime suspect in projected murder scenarios, but here again there is no satisfactory evidence. She did however claim, 30 years later to a young reporter when she was in her declining years in New York, that Bliss had concocted her step-by-step "predictions" of Reeves' suicide. Her subsequent flight from the law is as readily explained by what was already known of her routinely scandalous behaviour as by any imponderable motive she may have had for bumping off Superman. Still, we might plausibly picture some stupid drunken argument over the gun, and a fatal, albeit accidental discharge. The weapon, however, was too recently oiled to retain fingerprints, hers or his.
Which leaves the possibility of suicide. Was Reeves' career in ruins? Not necessarily. Although much has been made of his having been pathetically reduced to appearing in pro-am wrestling matches dressed in his Superman costume, this was a publicity stunt that Reeves had cheerfully undertaken during the Superman run, and he trained hard for the few bouts he fought. This was not his likely future. He had ably directed several of the later episodes of Superman, and was well positioned for a career in TV direction, which he took seriously. Reeves also had his new girlfriend, Leonore - a piece of work, to be sure, but lots of fun - and a holiday, if not a "honeymoon", had been arranged and was eagerly anticipated. He had been drinking heavily on the night he died, but he had the constitution of an elephant: drink never seemed to affect him anyway. The shell-casing found beneath his body suggested certain realities of ballistics not reconcilable with a verdict of suicide.
The death of George Reeves continues to perplex and infuriate those who would attempt to solve it. All the witnesses are dead or scattered, the archives are closed, the coroner's reports filed, the case allegedly solved, but to no one's satisfaction . What we do have is Hollywoodland, a careful and compelling sifting of the facts and possibilities. It cannot solve the mystery, but it does offer the restless soul of George Reeves a worthwhile memorial, which is perhaps the best he can hope for.
William Desmond Taylor, 1922 The still-unsolved shooting of Taylor, a director, in the wake of the Fatty Arbuckle affair and various drug scandals, led to a moral purge in the nascent California film colony. Suspects included popular star and cocaine fiend Mabel Normand, whose career was ruined; underage Taylor protege Mary Miles Minter; and/or her monstrous stage mother, who was also ruined. Another silent actress, Margaret Gibson, confessed to Taylor's murder on her deathbed in 1964.
Thomas Ince, 1924 Ince, talented silent director of many great westerns, died aboard the yacht of press magnate William Randolph Hearst. Officially it was a heart attack, but Ince was buried without an inquest before even his wife knew he was dead. It was rumoured that he was shot by Hearst, who mistook Ince for Charlie Chaplin, who was sleeping with Hearst's mistress, the actress Marion Davies. The case is the basis of the film The Cat's Meow (2001, Peter Bogdanovich).
Paul Bern, 1932 Writer, producer and director Paul Bern married platinum blonde Jean Harlow in early 1932, and months later was found naked, shot through the head and drenched in Harlow's perfume. It was widely believed to have been a suicide due to sexual impotence (a note for Harlow found by his body read, 'Last night was only a comedy'). However, a witness heard a car leaving the scene at the time of death. Screenwriter Ben Hecht later claimed that Bern's former lover, actress Dorothy Millette, killed him before committing suicide. MGM strongman Eddie Mannix was also accused of involvement.
Ramon Novarro, 1968 'Latin Lover', star of the 1925 version of Ben Hur, and boyfriend of Rudolph Valentino, Novarro invested wisely, retired rich and was murdered in 1968 by two hustler brothers, Tom and Paul Ferguson, whom he'd picked up for sex. For a mere $20, the pair tortured Novarro before asphyxiating him with a brass dildo given to him by Valentino.
Sal Mineo, 1976 The random murder of Rebel Without A Cause co. star Sal Mineo, aged 37, in his West Hollywood garage sparked a furore when the police described the killing as 'sexually related' (gay porn was found in Mineo's apartment), making Mineo briefly a gay-rights martyr. A career criminal named Lionel Ray Williams later confessed it was a random, non-sexual stabbing, and served 12 years.
Robert Blake, 2002 Blake, former child actor and co-star of In Cold Blood, was accused of killing his wife, Bonnie Lee Bakley, whom he had reluctantly married after learning she was the mother of his child. She was shot after dining with Blake, his alibi being that he had returned to the restaurant 'to pick up my gun'. He spent his fortune on lawyers, but beat the rap. A civil suit found him liable and he had to pay $30m to his wife's four children.
A murder investigation has been launched after a 14-year-old boy wounded in a double shooting in east London died in hospital.
Police were called to Moore Walk in Forest Gate on Monday and found two teenage boys, aged 14 and 17, with gunshot injuries.
The Metropolitan police has named the 14-year-old as Corey Junior Davis from Forest Gate.
The second victim is in a stable condition in hospital with ¡°potentially life changing injuries¡±. No arrests have been made.The Met has put extra officers on duty in the borough and authorised the use of stop and search tactics amid fears of retaliation.
DCI Dave Whellams, leading the investigation, said: ¡°This is a very tragic incident. A teenage boy¡¯s life has been taken in an extreme act of violence leaving his family utterly devastated.
¡°We are pursuing all lines of inquiry to catch the person responsible for Corey¡¯s murder and are keen to hear from anyone who believes they might have information to come forward as it could prove vital to our investigation.
¡°Our thoughts are with Corey¡¯s family at this very difficult time.¡°
There has been a surge in gun crime in the capital in the past year.
Met figures published in April revealed a 42% rise in gun offences ? up to 2,544 compared with 1,793 between April 2015 and 2016.
An off-duty nurse has described finding a man lying in a pool of blood from a gunshot wound across the road from a western Sydney primary school on Friday morning.
The nurse, who would only give his name as Sam, said he applied pressure to the wounded knee of the man who was lying in a church driveway near St John Vianney primary school in Greenacre.
Neighbours have said they heard several gunshots around 9.20am and Sam said there were two bullet casings on the ground near the shooting victim, believed to be aged in his mid 30s.
¡°He looked a little pale in the face ¡¦ of course anyone would be distressed if they got shot,¡± Sam said of the victim who has been taken to hospital.
No one has been arrested over the shooting.
The nearby school was put in lockdown, with police placing 100-metre cordon around Pandora Street.
The school lockdown was lifted just after 10.30am and parents have collected their children.
¡°It is really worrying because it is the second time something like this has happened near the school,¡± a mother said.
The mother, who didn¡¯t want to named, said the school had kept parents well informed with several text alerts of the incident.
¡°It is just for me, automatic to pick her up from school and bring her home,¡± she added.
¡°Things will happen everywhere in any suburb but having said that I believe the school have done what they could to protect the children and themselves.
¡°I fear the security of our kids. I would love to see more security.¡±
Her daughter said she was happy to be reunited with her parents.
¡°I felt scared because I didn¡¯t know what was happening and the first announcement that he [the principal] made was to lock the doors,¡± she said. ¡°So my heart started racing.¡±
Police are door-knocking nearby homes for more information.
A musician shot dead two members of a New York-based Iranian indie rock band and another musician on Monday, according to police and the group¡¯s manager.
Two of the victims played in The Yellow Dogs, a Brooklyn-based rock band that had moved to New York from Tehran. The third man who died was also a musician but did not play in the band. A fourth man, said to be an artist, was wounded.
Initial reports said the gunman was a former member of the band who had been kicked out. But the manager of The Yellow Dogs, Ali Salehezadeh, told the Associated Press that he was a member of another band from Iran, the Free Keys, who knew the victims but had not spoken to them in months because of a "petty conflict".
The shootings happened just after midnight in the East Williamsburg neighbourhood of Brooklyn. When police arrived at the scene, they found a 27-year-old man with a gunshot wound to the chest on the second floor, and a 35-year-old man with a gunshot wound to the head on the third floor. Both were dead. Another man was found on the same floor with a fatal gunshot wound to the head. His age was not immediately known.
A 22-year-old member of the band was wounded in the arm and was in a stable condition in hospital, according to the Associated Press.
The gunman was found on the roof with a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head, police said. A rifle was found next to his body. New York police commissioner Ray Kelly told the AP that the?gunman opened fire through a window, then went inside and continued firing.
The street where the shooting took place was cordoned off on Monday morning. A forensic team could be seen on the roof of the three-storey house the band were said to share. A police officer said the bodies were yet to be removed from the scene.
Williamsburg is popular with musicians and artists, although the area where the shooting took place is more industrial, with fewer homes and more warehouses.
Elless Domingo, 25, said he was visiting New York from Honolulu, Hawaii. He had arrived in the city on Sunday and was staying in an apartment with his girlfriend across the street from the shooting. "When we were walking home last night we both heard one gunshot," Domingo said. He said he heard the shot between 11.30pm and midnight.?"Fifteen to 20 minutes after the first, I heard another shot," he said.
Domingo said later he could see a Swat team on the roof of the building across the street. Armed police also went up to the roof of his building, he said.
The Yellow Dogs had moved to New York from Tehran, Iran. Their Facebook page said they were founded in 2006 and described their genre as "pschedelic/dance ? post punk". The band had recently played gigs at Williamsburg institutions including Brooklyn Bowl and Knitting Factory.
Maria Rodriguez, 50, has worked in Freddy's Deli, a block away from where the shooting took place, for 20 years. She said she was ¡°speechless" at the news. "It's quiet, very quiet,¡± she said of the neighbourhood. ¡°Especially at night time.¡±
South Africa was stunned yesterday after its most famous opera singer, Deon van der Walt, was found shot dead on his family's wine estate. The 47-year-old tenor was shot twice in the chest, apparently by his father, in a domestic tragedy that left the opera world distraught and baffled.
Charles van der Walt, 78, was named by police as the main suspect after he was found dead with a single gunshot wound to the temple.
Police declined to speculate on the motive and there were no immediate reports of a feud between father and son, leaving the country guessing as to why it had lost one of its greatest musical talents.
The bodies were found in separate bedrooms of the family home near Paarl, in Western Cape province, on Tuesday afternoon by the singer's mother, Sheila.
The opera world mourned the passing of the first South African to do the "grand slam" of performing at Milan's La Scala, London's Covent Garden, New York's Metropolitan and Vienna's state opera house. "He had a special gift. He was sensitive and expressive as an artist," said South Africa's culture minister, Pallo Jordan. "Those who knew him speak of his generosity and kindness." The chief executive of Cape Town's opera, Michael Williams, said the country had lost a role model for what South Africans could accomplish abroad.
Police said their investigation was not yet a murder inquiry and declined to speculate about motives. "It is alleged the father killed the 47-year-old man, Deon, and then himself," said a spokesman.
The son had gunshot wounds to his chest and the father had a single gunshot wound to his temple. They were thought to have died at about 2pm on Tuesday. Forensic experts were examining a gun removed from the scene. South African media reported that it was found beside the father. The family was expected last night to issue a statement through lawyers.
Van der Walt never reached the popular acclaim of Placido Domingo or Luciano Pavarotti, but was well known and respected within the opera fraternity.
He made his debut as Jaquino in Fidelio at the Kapstadt opera house while still a music student at the University of Stellenbosch, part of the Afrikaner ivy league. In 1981 he won the international Mozart competition in Salzburg and his career took off with invitations to opera houses and festivals across Europe and the United States.
Van der Walt made his Covent Garden debut in 1985 as Almaviva in Rossini's Barber of Seville. He performed at Munich, Barcelona and Hamburg under conductors including Riccardo Muti.
It was the era of apartheid sanctions and white South Africans were not always welcomed abroad, but the easy-going tenor was still able to carve a name for himself. A role as Tamino in the Magic Flute under Sir Georg Solti in 1991, the year after Nelson Mandela was released, earned particular acclaim.
A specialist in recitals, he showed his versatility by moving from Italian to French for the role of Romeo in Gounod's Romeo et Juliette at the Zurich opera house. While on tour in France Van der Walt would sometimes meet his professional golfer brother, Marcel, at vineyards to share their lifelong love of wine.
In 1988 they opened their own wine estate, Veenwouden, in a valley near spectacular views over the Klein-Drakenstein mountains 35 miles outside Cape Town. Specialising in Merlot and Cabernet, the estate limited production to 6,000 cases a year and won several awards.
A young woman shot dead by masked gunmen was an innocent victim caught in the crossfire of a gangland shooting, witnesses have said.
Mohanna Abdhou, 20, was out with friends when two men cycled up to them and opened fire outside Dickens House in Kilburn, north-west London, just before 9pm on Friday night.
Abdhou, known as Montana, was pronounced dead at 9.30pm and a postmortem examination on Saturday gave the cause of death as a single gunshot wound.
Abdhou and her friends had been standing next to a busy playground when the shots were fired, one of which hit her in the stomach. Witnesses said a number of young men, believed to be the intended targets, fled the scene following the attack.
¡°I was inside and I heard four gunshots,¡± Reiss Graham, 25, who has lived on the estate for six years, told the Evening Standard.
Graham said the area was troubled by gang feuds, but the shooting was unprecedented in its violence. ¡°It¡¯s gang wars between the Mozart estate and South Kilburn. They found a knife during the search for the casings,¡± he said. ¡°There were about 20 kids in the park, just having a really good time. It was 8.52pm ? I¡¯ll remember that time forever.¡±
In a statement, Abdhou¡¯s family described her as a ¡°beautiful and caring soul¡± and appealed for anyone with information to come forward.
The statement said: ¡°We are truly saddened, heartbroken and still in complete shock that we have lost a beautiful and caring soul. No words can truly express our feelings towards this situation.
¡°She was a loving daughter, sister and friend. She was loved by everyone and her warmth and kindness will be remembered fondly.
¡°The thought that anyone can go out there and murder an innocent person is truly heartbreaking and we wish that no other family ever goes through such distress. She will always be in our minds and in our hearts.¡±
DCI Andy Partridge, who is leading the investigation, said police had found nothing in Abdhou¡¯s background to suggest she could have been a target.
¡°Montana¡¯s family are devastated by her senseless killing, and I and my team are committed to finding those responsible and the reasons behind it,¡± Partridge said. ¡°I am continuing to appeal for anyone who was in the area of Dickens House at the time of the shooting, and who is yet to speak with police, to come forward and let us know what your saw or heard.¡±
The two suspects have been described as being of medium build and dressed in dark clothing. Police said their faces were covered which ¡°would have made them stand out on such a warm evening¡±.
One of the terrorists who carried out the London Bridge and Borough Market attacks lied about his age and gave a false name in order to get into the UK.
Rachid Redouane, 30, used the alias Rachid Elkhdar and told authorities he was five years younger than he was. It has not been disclosed when he entered Britain.
The details emerged at the opening of inquests into the deaths of Redouane, Khuram Shazad Butt, 27, and Youssef Zaghba, 22, who killed eight people on the night of 3 June.
The inquests initially went unreported because Southwark coroner¡¯s court failed to inform journalists about the session. The hearing was due to begin at 9.30am on Tuesday, but a weekly email listing the cases to be heard was not sent to media until 9.48am. The court later released a recording of the session.
Pete Clifton, editor-in-chief of Press Association, the UK¡¯s main news agency, said receiving notice of a such an important hearing 20 minutes after it was due to start was ¡°deeply unhelpful¡±.
The coroner¡¯s court is just yards from where the attacks took place earlier this month.
DCI Simon Moring of the Metropolitan police told the court that all three men died after being shot by police officers at Borough Market.
A provisional postmortem gave Butt¡¯s cause of death as ¡°multiple gunshot wounds¡±.
Senior coroner Dr Andrew Harris said unemployed Butt was born in Jahelum, Pakistan, on 20 April 1990. He was married and living in Barking, east London when he died.
Redouane, also of Barking, was initially identified ? through fingerprints held by the immigration service ? as Rachid Elkhdar, born 31 July 1991, Moring said.
¡°However, a statement was taken from his wife who stated he used that name when he entered the country and his real name was Rachid Redouane, date of birth 31 July 1986,¡± he told the court.
¡°Subsequent fingerprint comparisons made against national identity documents held in Morocco again confirmed the name Rachid Redouane.¡±
Moring said the postmortem gave the cause of death as multiple gunshot wounds to the chest and abdomen, but added that the full autopsy would take several months.
Zaghba, who lived in Ilford, was primarily identified by fingerprints from the Moroccan authorities and dental records. The court heard that he was born on 26 January 1995 in Fez, Morocco and was known as an audio technician.
Harris said he was satisfied that all three suspected deaths were unnatural and opened their inquests.
He added that Mark Lucraft QC, the chief coroner, had agreed it was ¡°appropriate for me to suspend my inquiries into all three deaths, which I do pending further inquiries by police and decisions by the chief coroner¡±.
The Met issued a press release at 6.01pm stating that evidence it had presented to the court was accepted by the coroner.
¡°The inquest into the deaths of the three men shot dead by police following the terrorist attack at London Bridge and Borough Market has been opened and adjourned at Southwark coroner¡¯s court today (Tuesday, 27 June),¡± it said. ¡°Their inquests were adjourned to a later date to be set.¡±
An unarmed black 18-year-old was fatally shot in the face by a police officer from several feet away during their confrontation outside a supermarket in Virginia earlier this year, the findings of his autopsy indicate.
The typical signs of a close- or body-contact shooting were not found around the bullet wounds William Chapman sustained in the head and chest when he was killed by Officer Stephen Rankin in the parking lot of a Walmart in Portsmouth on 22 April. Chapman was the second unarmed man to be shot dead by Rankin.
¡°There is no evidence of close-range fire to visual inspection,¡± wrote Wendy Gunther, an assistant chief medical examiner for Virginia. Gunther said a definitive ruling would be made by the state¡¯s department of forensic sciences.
A copy of Gunther¡¯s report was obtained by the Guardian from a source who was not authorised to release it to the media, along with a separate toxicology report from state forensic investigators that said Chapman¡¯s blood showed no traces of alcohol or drugs.
Rankin and Chapman engaged in a physical struggle after Rankin tried to arrest the 18-year-old on suspicion of shoplifting from the Walmart, according to police. Witnesses said Chapman broke free and then stepped back towards the officer aggressively before being shot twice. A decision on whether Rankin will be prosecuted is expected to be made by authorities in the coming days.
An attorney for Chapman¡¯s family, who said he was preparing a civil lawsuit against Rankin even before state prosecutors make their decision, said the physical evidence suggested Chapman had not been near enough to Rankin to pose a threat.
¡°If an unarmed person is not in close proximity to the police officer, not in his so-called ¡®wingspan¡¯, then to say the officer shooting and killing that person is pretty excessive may be the greatest understatement of the year,¡± said attorney Jon Michael Babineau.
Gunther¡¯s report said ¡°no fouling or stippling¡± ? the sooty residue and speckled gunpowder burns typically left by a close- or intermediate-range gunshot ? were found on the skin around either of Chapman¡¯s wounds, nor on the clothing where the shot to his chest entered.
Dr Judy Melinek, a prominent California-based forensic pathologist who frequently testifies as an expert witness, said in an email after reviewing the autopsy report that unless some other object created an obstruction between Rankin and Chapman, ¡°the absence of soot or stippling means it is a distant range gunshot wound¡±. Melinek classes a ¡°distant¡± shot as being from more than 30 inches away.Dr David Fowler, the chief medical examiner for neighbouring Maryland, said in a brief telephone interview on Friday: ¡°These are fairly small particles, and while they may be coming out at the same speed as the bullet, they have very little mass and an odd shape, so they lose velocity very rapidly.¡±
Fowler added: ¡°Typically the fragments of unburnt gunpowder and soot travel out somewhere in the region up to 12in for a handgun, maximum, maybe 18in for a very powerful handgun.¡±
The Virginia autopsy was carried out the day after Chapman¡¯s death. The report also said Chapman¡¯s hands were cuffed behind his back. Babineau, the attorney for Chapman¡¯s family, said scuff-like abrasions on the 18-year-old¡¯s face and chest indicated he was rolled on to his front, cuffed, then rolled back again, after being fatally shot. Chapman was 5ft 8in tall and weighed about 185lbs.
Police and store managers still have not said if Chapman was found to have stolen anything from Walmart. The autopsy report lists clothes and shoes as his only personal effects, including a pair of trousers with the pockets turned inside out.
His family said he frequently browsed the store. Babineau said that through his own inquiries and interviews with witnesses, he had found no indication Chapman was carrying stolen merchandise, and that he appeared to have turned out the pockets to show they were empty.
This may be answered conclusively by surveillance footage recorded inside the store that was collected by investigators. The shooting itself, which took place just inside the perimeter of the large parking lot, close to the street, is understood not to have been captured on camera.
An inquiry into the shooting has been completed by Virginia state police and passed to Stephanie Morales, the Virginia commonwealth¡¯s attorney for Portsmouth. The prosecutor also commissioned ¡°additional investigative work¡± and tests by the state department of forensic science, according to Tamara Shewmake, a spokeswoman for the prosecutor.
The spokeswoman said earlier this week that following a delay, Morales expected to have received all the forensic files by Friday 21 August.
¡°Once all findings have been turned over to the commonwealth¡¯s attorney, there will be a review and final prosecutorial determination,¡± Shewmake said.
Sources familiar with the inquiry said the week-long delay was due to Morales commissioning an advanced type of forensic analysis that had never before been completed by Virginia state officials.
The sources said Morales, who is 31 and newly elected earlier this year, had no intention of passing the case to an outside jurisdiction or special prosecutor, and that she had indicated she would present the case to a grand jury within Portsmouth, which is an independent city, if she decided to prosecute Rankin.
Portsmouth police and Virginia state police still decline to confirm Rankin was the officer who shot Chapman. His identity was confirmed to the Guardian by Sean McGowan, the executive director of the Virginia Police Benevolent Association, Rankin¡¯s union.
Once Rankin¡¯s name was published, McGowan denied he had confirmed it, then suggested he had not been authorised to confirm it, then said he would never again speak to a reporter from the newspaper. McGowan has refused to identify Rankin¡¯s attorney or an alternative representative.
Rankin, 36, is a veteran of the US navy who earned a grey belt in the the Marine Corps martial arts programme, which requires the ability to ¡°stop an aggressor¡¯s attack¡± with hand-to-hand combat.
The officer was placed on administrative leave after shooting Chapman. In April 2011 he fatally shot Kirill Denyakin, a Kazakh cook, less than three miles from the site of Chapman¡¯s death. Denyakin was shot 11 times by Rankin, who was responding to a 911 call about the 26-year-old aggressively banging at the door of a building where he was staying.
Rankin said he shot Denyakin because the cook, who was drunk, charged at him while reaching into the waistband of his jeans. The officer said he feared Denyakin would pull out a weapon. No weapon was found.
A grand jury declined to indict Rankin on criminal charges and a jury in a $22m civil lawsuit brought by Denyakin¡¯s family found in Rankin¡¯s favour.
Among 250 posts defending himself on a local newspaper website, Rankin wrote: ¡°22 mil wont buy your boy back,¡± adding that most Americans could not hope to earn that in an entire career, ¡°let alone a habitual drunk working as a hotel cook¡±.
The tragedy of children killed accidentally by guns in the US is laid bare in new research that shows that as many as 100 boys and girls aged 14 and under are dying each year, substantially more than federal statistics have previously suggested.
Everytown and Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America ? affiliated groups that campaign for stronger gun laws ? have studied the incidents of publicly reported unintentional gun deaths involving children in the period of a year from 15 December 2012 to 14 December 2013. The report exposes a long list of lives cut short as a result of largely preventable calamities.
Like the one that befell two-year-old Sincere Smith in Conway, South Carolina, who was relaxing after a heavy meal of chicken and mac and cheese on Christmas day when he spotted an object on the living room table. It was a .38-caliber handgun that his father had bought two weeks before and had left on the table while he went to make a phone call. Sincere picked it up and fired a single shot through his own chest; he died en route to hospital.
Or that of Trinity Ross, aged four, who was playing with her six-year-old brother and another boy aged five at home in Kansas City, Missouri. While her stepmother was looking for something in the car outside the house, Trinity¡¯s brother discovered a revolver tucked under a jacket on a living room chair. He picked it up and pulled the trigger, accidentally hitting Trinity in the head; she died in hospital several days later.
Or Christopher Stanlane, aged 10, who was sitting on the floor at home in Fairmont, North Carolina, watching TV as his father was cleaning his shotgun on the couch beside him. The gun fired by mistake, hitting Christopher in the back of the head; he died instantly.
By the reckoning of Everytown and Moms Demand Action, such unbearable incidents are all too common ? occurring at a rate of almost two a day across the US. The figure of 100 deaths the groups identified is substantially higher than the figure of 62 children recorded by federal authorities who die on average each year from unintentional gun incidents.
Shannon Watts, founder of Moms Demand Action, said historic underrepresentation of the problem underlined the lack of investment that was going into understanding and dealing with the crisis of child gun deaths. She blamed that in turn upon the influence of the National Rifle Association and the gun lobby which have applied sustained pressure on federal agencies to block research into accidental deaths involving firearms.
¡°We don¡¯t understand the problem of child gun deaths fully, and so we don¡¯t understand how we can prevent it. In this country we take the death of children very seriously ? we have laws to prevent children getting stuck in freezers, or drowning in pools, yet we turn a blind eye when it comes to firearms. This is a national tragedy and it has to stop,¡± she said.
The researchers found that some 70% of the deaths identified during the 12 months of the survey could have been prevented given simple measures to store and lock guns in the home unloaded. About a third of American children live in homes with guns ? a product of the ubiquitous nature of weapons in society ? and studies have suggested that 1.7 million kids live in homes with guns that are both loaded and unlocked.
Paradoxically, eight out of 10 of the deaths occurred in places where children are supposed to be coddled and safe: their homes or in homes of relatives, or in the family car. Basic childhood curiosity appears to have been behind many of the disasters, particularly of boys, with 77% of the victims and 82% of the shooters being male.
The ages of two to four, and 10 to 13 are particularly perilous in terms of gun deaths.
Two-thirds of the incidents involved guns that were legally owned by family members, usually a parent. In almost half of those cases, no charges were brought against the gun owner for negligence or other reckless behavior.
The report highlights other ways in which the NRA has been seminal in preventing the introduction of gun safety laws directed at children. It has lobbied vociferously against the recommendations of several professional bodies including the American Academy of Pediatrics that doctors should be allowed to advise patients about the importance of gun safety measures in the home.
The NRA has also opposed moves to introduce smart technology that only allow weapons to be fired by their biometrically-identified owners.
Moms Demand Action and Everytown want to see a number of reforms to improve safety for children. The proposals include the introduction at state level of laws that would penalize gun owners who fail to store their weapons responsibly; increased federal research into child gun deaths; funding for the development of smart technologies used in gun safety devices; and education schemes that include doctors to make parents more aware of the dangers.
¡°The lives of American children are precious, they matter. Legislators need to stand up and say, regardless of the efforts of the gun lobby to protect their profits, we are going to protect our children,¡± Watts said.
Islamic State has claimed responsibility for the shooting and hostage situation that left two men dead in Melbourne overnight.
The gunman, named by police on Tuesday as Yacqub Khayre, took a woman hostage in an apartment building in Brighton, 11km south-east of Melbourne¡¯s central business district, on Monday night.
Police shot him dead after he emerged from the complex with a sawn-off shotgun, shooting at officers. They then discovered the body of another man in the foyer of the apartment block.
Three police officers were shot during the siege, although their injuries were not life-threatening. Two police suffered hand injuries and a third was injured in the face and neck area.
The hostage had been called to the apartment through an escort service on Monday, police said. On Tuesday police said the woman was traumatised but not hurt. The dead man had been working at the serviced apartments.
Isis published a statement via a news agency linked to the group, saying the attack had been carried out by one of its soldiers.
¡°The attack in Melbourne, Australia, was carried out by a soldier of the Islamic State in response to the call for targeting the subjects of the coalition states,¡± said a statement published on the group¡¯s Amaq news agency and translated by Reuters.
The Seven Network reported the gunman called the organisation saying ¡°This is for IS [Islamic State]. This is for al-Qaida.¡±
That appeared to conflict with Isis¡¯s claim of direct responsibility.
Victoria police confirmed on Tuesday morning they were treating the siege as an act of terrorism. The state¡¯s chief police commissioner, Graham Ashton, said it was still unclear whether it was a planned or spontaneous attack.
Ashton said police had not yet established whether Isis was directly involved. He cautioned against placing too much faith in Isis¡¯s claim of responsibility.
¡°We know that Islamic State have jumped in and claimed responsibility, but we also know they do that at the drop of a hat,¡± Ashton said.
The New York Times reporter Rukmini Callimachi, who has written extensively on Isis claims, said on Twitter the Melbourne sequence of events appeared to fit a pattern where supporters of the terrorist movement took matters into their own hands without necessarily having direct instructions from Isis.
Ashton confirmed the identity of the attacker as Khayre, who was previously charged over an alleged terrorism plot targeting the Holsworthy army barracks in Sydney.
He was acquitted. But Khayre, whom Ashton described as having an extensive criminal history, had been behind bars for other offences. He was released in November and was on parole at the time of Monday¡¯s attack.
Ashton said Khayre had a ¡°counter-terrorism background¡± going back to 2009, but said law enforcement had not currently considered him a heightened risk.
¡°We have hundreds of people that we need to try and keep an eye on and we do that in conjunction with the commonwealth intelligence agencies and the Australian federal police,¡± Ashton told the ABC. ¡°He wasn¡¯t someone who we had heightened concerns about at the moment.¡±
Ashton said two of his officers had required surgery after being injured during the siege. ¡°We¡¯ve got three officers wounded at the scene in the gunfight with this individual, fortunately they look like they¡¯re OK,¡± he told Channel Seven.
The Channel Seven reporter Paul Dowsley reported that his newsroom had been called by a man claiming to be linked to the siege. ¡°My colleague could hear a woman screaming in the background,¡± he said.
Police arrived at the Buckingham serviced apartments in Bay Street about 4pm after receiving reports of an explosion. ¡°It¡¯s believed he has a woman inside with him who he won¡¯t allow to leave,¡± a police spokeswoman said at the time. The police attempted to negotiate with the man.
A Brighton resident, Gemma, was on the corner of Hillcrest Avenue and Bay Street when she heard gunshots. ¡°They were really fast-paced, quick, lots of them and we ran,¡± she told the Australian Associated Press.
By 6pm, police had shot Khayre dead after he emerged from one of the apartments and opened fire on them.
Police did not communicate with Khayre during the standoff, said a deputy police commissioner, Andrew Crisp.¡°Just before 6pm whilst police resources were in the vicinity of the serviced apartments a male has exited one of the services apartments and began firing at police members,¡± he said. ¡°Police members returned fire and as a result the man who exited the serviced apartments was fatally shot. As a result of the gunfire three police members were injured.¡±
While the initial reports were of an explosion, Crisp said it was likely the explosion was likely to have been gunfire.
Victoria¡¯s premier, Daniel Andrews, praised the work of officers and the Victorian police, who ¡°sacrifice so much to keep us safe¡±.
4pm Police respond to a call about an explosion at an apartment building in Brighton. They start trying to negotiate with a man inside an apartment, who was holding a woman against her will.
5.41pm Seven Network Melbourne newsroom gets a call from a woman who says she¡¯s involved in a hostage situation. A man takes over the phone call to say: ¡°This is for IS, this is for al-Qaida.¡± Seven calls police to report the call.
6pm A gunman leaves the building and opens fire on police, injuring three of them. Police fire back and kill him. They find a dead man in the foyer, he appears to have been shot. The woman is freed. Two police officers are taken to hospital with gunshot wounds, a third is treated at the scene.
A man shot dead at a pool party in Surrey has been named as Ricardo Hunter.
The 34-year-old from Coulsdon in Surrey died during the private party in Headley during the early hours of Monday, Surrey police said.
Earlier this week, Summerlyn Farquharson, an organiser of the party who goes by the name The Female Boss Krissy, denied the event was a ¡°sex party¡± and said she did not know the victim.
A postmortem showed the cause of Hunter¡¯s death was a single gunshot wound.
Detectives are continuing to appeal for information about the attack in which a 36-year-old woman also suffered a gunshot wound to her leg.
Police said a 38-year-old man from London who was arrested on suspicion of murder and attempted murder in connection with the incident remains in custody. A 30-year-old woman from London who was arrested on suspicion of assisting an offender in connection with the incident has been released on conditional bail until September.
Officers from the Surrey and Sussex major crime team launched a murder investigation and are carrying out enquiries to establish the circumstances surrounding the death.
Forensic teams are still carrying out a detailed examination of the address and police said this is expected to continue for a number of days.
DCI Paul Rymarz said: ¡°This was a shocking incident where a man lost his life and we are determined to bring those responsible to justice.
¡°Following the incident we quickly launched a large-scale police investigation to speak to anyone who was at the private pool party and gather all relevant information to establish what happened.
¡°We know there were several hundred people at the pool party in Church Lane on the evening of Sunday 24 July into the early hours of Monday 25 July and although we have already spoken to a number of witnesses we intend to speak to everyone who was at the party.
¡°I would therefore ask anyone who was at the event and may have seen what happened or with any footage or information who has not spoken to police to come forward as a matter of urgency.
¡°I would like to assure people that we will treat any reports or information provided in the strictest confidence. This incident has understandably sent shockwaves through the Headley community and we are working with our safer neighbourhood team colleagues to update and reassure residents.
¡°I would like to thank residents for their patience while our investigation continues and stress that we do not believe there is any ongoing risk to Headley residents.¡±
Neighbours described hundreds of people gathering for the party, which had been advertised on social media, and complained of loud music going on into the early hours of Monday when the shooting happened.
Broken glass and rubbish were left strewn around the property the following morning.
There was just one witness today, defence ballistics expert Tom Wolmarans, and his rather testy cross-examination by prosecutor Gerrie Nel is not over yet. Nel set out to take apart the defence case, supported by Wolmarans, that Reeva Steenkamp was close behind the toilet door when the first two shots were fired by Oscar Pistorius, then sustained a head wound from another shot while she was falling backward on to a wooden magazine rack.
? Wolmarans testified that he believes Steenkamp was standing close behind the toilet door when the first two bullets hit her hip and arm. He concludes she was falling as she was hit by a subsequent bullet that caused her head wound.
? Wolmarans said an injury to Steenkamp's back was not caused by a ricochet bullet, as the state argues, but occurred when she fell backwards on to a wooden magazine rack. The ricochet bullet ended up in the toilet bowl, Wolmarans says: the state's version "doesn't make sense". There would have been enough energy in the bullet for it to rebound and fall into the toilet, but not enough energy to inflict injury. But Nel said that for Steenkamp to have fallen on to the rack, given she was found with her head slumped over the toilet, she would have had to have got up. Wolmarans says if she was falling as the last shot was fired, she could have been seated on the floor.
? Nel said striation marks on Steenkamp's back matched the bullet fragment found in the toilet bowl. "I can't see the resemblance," was Wolmarans' response.
? Wolmarans said Pistorius could be wrong in his recollection of where the magazine rack was situated.
? Nel noted that Wolmarans' completed report is dated 23 April 2014, after all earlier forensics witnesses had been questioned and cross-examined in court. Nel returned on several occasions to Wolmarans' apparent lack of record-keeping.
? Wolmarans admitted going for a beer with defence witness Dixon after the latter finished his testimony but said he would not have altered his own report on Dixon's advice because he was not a ballistics expert.
?? After decibel tests to ascertain whether a cricket bat striking the door could be mistaken for gunshots, Wolmarans concluded the sounds of the cricket bat and gunshots were very similar, with the bat not quite as loud. The sound tests took place at the house of Arnold Pistorius, the athlete's uncle, and Oscar Pistorius wielded the bat. But this evidence was undermined by Wolmarans' repeated insistence that he was not a sound expert and references to his hearing loss and tinnitus. Nel queried why background noise on the bat recording is much louder than on that for the gunshots (could the first have been amplified?).
? Nel queried Wolmarans' assertion that the bullets used to shoot Steenkamp were not Black Talons, as had been previously reported, but ranger bullets, which have a similar "mushroom" effect on flesh. Captain Mangena, the state ballistic expert, maintains the bullets were Black Talons. Pistorius did not dispute this when he gave his evidence.
The court will resume on Monday morning.
Cleveland officials said on Tuesday that they were sacking six police officers involved in a 137-shot barrage that killed two unarmed black people after a high-speed chase.
Those officers included Michael Brelo, a patrolman acquitted of manslaughter charges in May for having fired the last 15 shots of the barrage in East Cleveland on 29 November 2012. The chase began when officers standing outside police headquarters mistook the sound of a beat-up Chevrolet Malibu backfiring as a gunshot.
Six more officers who fired during the barrage face suspensions ranging from 21 to 30 days, said public safety director Michael McGrath, the former police chief. A total of 13 officers had been notified they faced administrative discipline, and one of them has retired, McGrath said.
The president of Cleveland¡¯s largest police union, Steve Loomis, vowed to fight the discipline and said grievances appealing the firings were filed with the city on Tuesday. He described the firings as unbelievable, unprecedented and politically motivated.
¡°It¡¯s tragic that it went down this way, but at the end of the day, two people high on crack cocaine, high on marijuana, one of them intoxicated, made the decisions that they made and we responded to them,¡± Loomis said. ¡°And we responded within our training.¡±
The officers had been cited for joining the chase or leaving the city without permission. More seriously, some were accused of endangering other officers by creating or contributing to a crossfire situation.
McGrath said officials reviewed hundreds of pages of related documents and multimedia to reach decisions on discipline.
¡°It was very difficult ¡¦ But at the end of the day, there were general police orders. There are manual rules and regulations that we expect officers to comply with,¡± McGrath said. ¡°If they didn¡¯t comply with those particular general police orders or manual rules and regulations, I sustained charges.¡±
The high-speed chase involved 62 police cruisers and more than 100 officers. The shooting killed both occupants of the car. Timothy Russell was hit by 24 shots, Malissa Williams by 23.
Authorities never learned why Russell did not stop. He had a criminal record including convictions for receiving stolen property and robbery and had been involved in a previous police pursuit. Williams had convictions for drug-related charges and attempted abduction. Both were described as mentally ill, homeless and addicted to drugs. A crack pipe was found in the car.
Of the officers who were fired, only Brelo faced criminal charges. Prosecutors said he stood on the vehicle¡¯s hood and fired inside repeatedly after the car had stopped and its occupants were no longer a threat.
Defense attorneys said the officers involved in the chase and shooting had probable cause to believe the people in the car were a safety threat. Brelo¡¯s disciplinary letter cites that and also notes that he fired 49 times, more than double any other officer involved.
Investigators eventually concluded Russell and Williams were not armed.
¡°Everything is devastated,¡± the security guards tell us. It¡¯s Tuesday 29 September 2015 and they are explaining how our Action Against Hunger offices in Central African Republic (CAR) have been looted and destroyed. The team is quiet, tired ? but not surprised.
I had arrived in the capital, Bangui, five days earlier. The Saturday before our office was attacked I was getting ready to visit the Bangui pediatric center with my colleague, a doctor who treats malnourished children. I was at the house gates when we received our first safety alert: ¡°No movement allowed, everyone stay in the house¡±. That didn¡¯t feel particularly unusual for Bangui though ? the situation here has remained unstable, despite a great deal of work having been done to encourage social cohesion since the conflict was at its peak in early 2014.
We were no longer at a high level of emergency in Bangui: more than 23,000 internally displaced people have returned home since January, leaving camps because they finally felt safe, and they have been starting to rebuild their lives.
However in the rest of the country, the violence continues. There are 338,000 people internally displaced within the provinces and 461,000 refugees remain in neighbouring countries. And as the country gets closer to the scheduled date of the elections, families are again living in fear.On this Saturday tensions were particularly high. Clashes took place in Bangui after a motorcycle taxi driver was killed on Friday night, and violence was beginning to spread across the country.
I could sense the level of anxiety in the Action Against Hunger guesthouse. We later heard that several armed men had entered the paediatric centre that morning claiming to be ¡°searching for someone¡±. So confined to our accommodation, we spent our time on the phone, collecting information from our Central African colleagues about the fighting going on around us.
I used this time to get to know my new colleagues. One of them taught me to recognise the sounds and the distance of gunshots. He also advised me to keep a bag ready, ¡°just in case¡±.
On Sunday night during a team meeting, a colleague told us how she had been verbally harassed by a man in front of the office, just a few metres from the compound we called home. He was threatening her because of her link to the NGO. At this point I sensed that the situation was different from previous unrest. And it got worse.
Around midnight the gunshots became very intense, like fireworks, especially at the gendarmerie close to our compound. We were following the shootings on Twitter and by phone. One of my friends, working for another international humanitarian organisation who lived a few blocks away, told me several men armed with knives tried to enter their home but failed. The next morning I heard that they returned and looted the house, with the staff present.
By noon on Monday several international NGOs, a UN agency and houses in our neighbourhood had been looted and some expatriates evacuated. A few of our neighbours called to inform us that we were next and to be careful.
Given the threats, we launched an evacuation plan on Monday afternoon but we learned that those who were supposed to evacuate us didn¡¯t have the means. We were stuck. We prepared to stay another night in the fear of being looted, but were then told the evacuation could in fact go ahead. Waiting for it was terrible. There was not much talking, but still we were supporting each other. At around 8pm, we finally left the house.Minutes after we left, our neighbours intervened when looters arrived there, preventing them from entering. But they were unable to stop them breaking into our offices, only a few meters away. Looters arrived there at around 11pm and stayed for four hours.
Earlier, we had managed to save essential medicine to supply the paediatric centre, which helped us to continue the care of young malnourished patients, though two-thirds of them had fled in fear. The rest of our medicine stocks were stolen. The cars, the furniture, our documents, even the water, sanitation and hygiene equipment were destroyed and left on the ground.
Without these materials it is difficult to keep up our activities across the country, especially with the current insecurity in some areas of Bangui and on the main roads hindering access to supplies.
It¡¯s probably the toughest part of an evacuation for an aid worker: the ones you leave behind. Evacuated to another country temporarily, I left other colleagues with the task of rebuilding our capacity to respond, while the humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate. I also left behind more than 42,000 newly displaced people lacking humanitarian assistance because humanitarian organisations don¡¯t have access and are still being targeted. And I left behind at least 67 dead and hundreds of wounded people that even ambulances couldn¡¯t pick up during the violence because access was too dangerous.
I have temporarily left CAR with one fear: that the country will once again become a forgotten crisis, where half of the population needs humanitarian assistance to survive and where men, women and children are not protected as they should be. That it becomes a protracted crisis where NGOs still have to call for a distinction between their activities and political action because they are targeted, and where the population is held hostage by armed groups and a lack of interest from the international community.
Join our community of development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP on Twitter.
At least four people have been killed after gunmen opened fire at government offices in the Mexican beach resort of Cancun, a day after at least five people died in a shooting at a music festival nearby.
Rodolfo del Angel Campos, chief of police for the state of Quintana Roo, said gunfire broke out at the state attorney general¡¯s office in Cancun, a city that is one of the most popular seaside destinations for foreign tourists in Mexico.
Police intervened, and the alarm was sounded, activating federal police and the armed forces, del Angel said, adding that other installations were also attacked. Television broadcast outbreaks of afternoon gunfire in Cancun.
One policeman and three suspected gunmen were killed, and a further five suspects arrested, state governor Carlos Joaquin told Mexican television on Tuesday evening.
¡°The state is under control and in order,¡± Joaquin said, adding that he had arranged with the Interior Ministry to send federal forces to reinforce security. ¡°People from Cancun and our visitors can go about their lives as normal.¡±
The centre of the city was tense on Tuesday night. Shortly after the gunbattle at the prosecutors¡¯ office, a convoy of police trucks descended on the Plaza de las Americas mall where hundreds of shoppers had fled after people reported hearing gunfire. Soldiers in full battle gear cleared the property.
Later, an official with the prosecutor¡¯s office said the mall scare proved to be a false alarm.
Joaquin, who took office in September, described the attacks as a reaction by gangsters to his crackdown on organised crime, which he said had enjoyed impunity for years.
The ruling Institutional Revolutionary party (PRI) has been reviewing disciplinary action against Joaquin¡¯s predecessor, former PRI state governor Roberto Borge, whom the opposition has accused of fraud and corruption. He denies any wrongdoing.
Lying on the Caribbean coast of eastern Mexico, Quintana Roo has suffered sporadic violence in the past few years as drug cartels battle for control of the lucrative local market.
Changes in power have been known to inflame turf wars between gangs as they fight for supremacy.
On Monday, at least five people were killed and 15 wounded when a gunman opened fire in a nightclub in the resort of Playa del Carmen. The shooting was not being investigated as a suspected terror attack.
A 13-year-old Ohio boy who was shot dead by a Columbus police officer investigating a report of an armed robbery was to be laid to rest this weekend.
Attorneys for the family of Tyre King said funeral and visitation services would be held on Saturday morning at a Columbus church.
Police have said officer Bryan Mason shot Tyre on 14 September, after the boy ran from investigators and pulled out a BB gun that looked like a real firearm.
¡°Based on the location and the direction of the wound paths it is more likely than not that Tyre King was in the process of running away from the shooter or shooters when he suffered all three gunshot wounds,¡± an independent examiner retained by the King family, Dr Francisco Diaz, said in a statement from the family released this week.
Diaz found that Tyre, who he noted was 5ft tall and weighed less than 100lbs, died from three gunshot wounds, ¡°any of which could be determined to have been cause of death¡±.
Evidence in the shooting investigation will automatically be presented to a grand jury to determine if the officer¡¯s actions were justified or charges are warranted.
The King family has called for an independent investigation. Its attorneys said the eighth-grader played football and other sports, and was in a young scholars program.
Police and gang sources have scotched reports the fatal Gold Coast shooting of a man who was left in a hospital car park on Saturday sprang from bikie conflict.
The linking of the shooting to a brawl between gangs at a Tweed Heads venue on State of Origin night sparked another round of political sparring between the Queensland government and opposition over their crime-fighting credentials.
But superintendent Wayne Starling, of New South Wales police, said the ongoing murder investigation had found ¡°no evidence whatsoever to suggest [the shooting] is a retaliation by any bikie group¡±.
A senior source within the Lone Wolf gang, one of a number of self-styled ¡°outlaw¡± clubs targeted in various state government crackdowns over the past decade, said a News Corp report that the man was one of their number was wrong.
¡°We¡¯ve accounted for all our blokes,¡± the gang source told Guardian Australia. ¡°We don¡¯t know who [the victim] is.¡±
Starling said the shooting victim, who was ¡°known to police¡±, was dropped at Tweed Heads hospital on Saturday by a woman who was now among witnesses being interviewed.
The man died ¡°as a result of a gunshot wound to his torso¡± despite the best efforts of medical staff, Starling told reporters on Sunday.
Starling said the dead man was ¡°not a member of any outlaw motorcycle gang known to us¡±. He was unable to release the victim¡¯s details as police had difficulties locating next of kin.
The News Corp report said a Lone Wolf bikie was believed to have been ambushed or shot during a meeting between Lone Wolf and Bandidos bikies to resolve differences after a brawl at Seagulls on Wednesday.
The gang source described the Wednesday incident as minor, saying the suggestion that the shooting death was payback for that was ridiculous.
Starling said there was ¡°no evidence whatsoever to suggest that this fellow died as a result of the brawl at Seagulls last week¡±.
There was likewise no evidence backing a rumour the man was shot outside a bikie clubhouse ¡°however it¡¯s still very early in the investigation. We¡¯re still looking at all avenues of inquiry¡±.
¡°We never rule anything out in an investigation,¡± Starling said. ¡°All I can say at this point of time is the shooting occurred yesterday afternoon and we have not detected any evidence that outlaw motorcycle gangs are involved in the shooting.¡±
John-Paul Langbroek, the Surfers Paradise Liberal National party MP, had earlier commented in connection with the shooting that Queensland police were alarmed at a bikie resurgence after the Labor government rollback of contentious LNP laws.
¡°The police and community know the bikies are emboldened and on the comeback because the Palaszczuk government has rolled out the red carpet,¡± he told News Corp.
Grace Grace, a Palaszczuk government minister, in turn denied there was a problem with bikie crime on the Gold Coast.
¡°My understanding is the problem hasn¡¯t gotten any worse and that it is getting better,¡± she said.
Starling, the commander of the Tweed Heads police district just south of the border, said he would not comment ¡°on government policy¡± but in his opinion there was ¡°no bikie problem at the southern end of the Gold Coast¡±.
¡°All I can say at this stage is a fellow¡¯s been killed, he¡¯s been killed in our area and we will solve this crime,¡± he said.
Click here for a printable version of this crossword.
Police said a Florida man who asked if a bulletproof vest ¡°still worked¡± was fatally shot by his cousin.
A Tampa police report said 23-year-old Joaquin Mendez put on the vest late on Saturday and ¡°wondered aloud whether it still worked¡±.
The report said Mendez¡¯s cousin, 24-year-old Alexandro Garibaldi, pulled out a gun and responded: ¡°Let¡¯s see.¡±
Officers found Mendez outside the house with a gunshot wound in his chest. He died at a hospital.
According to the police report, Garibaldi initially told officers he found his wounded cousin after hearing a gunshot. However, police said a witness described Garibaldi shooting Mendez.
Police said the vest was found inside the house, having sustained a gunshot.
Garibaldi was held on Sunday without bond on a manslaughter charge. Hillsborough County jail records did not show whether he had an attorney.
"The one thing a violent rapist deserves is to face is a good woman with a gun!" That was Wayne LaPierre, executive director of the National Rifle Association, the standard bearers for America's gun lobby, making the case that personal firearms prevent rape.
The assertion that guns offer protection is a mantra the NRA has repeated often. In the wake of the Sandy Hook school shooting, LaPierre opined: "The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun", insisting that schools should have armed guards.
Academics such as John Lott and Gary Kleck have long claimed that more firearms reduce crime. But is this really the case? Stripped of machismo bluster, this is at heart a testable claim that merely requires sturdy epidemiological analysis. And this was precisely what Prof Charles Branas and his colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania examined in their 2009 paper investigating the link between gun possession and gun assault. They compared 677 cases in which people were injured in a shooting incident with 684 people living in the same area that had not suffered a gun injury. The researchers matched these "controls" for age, race and gender. They found that those with firearms were about 4.5 times more likely to be shot than those who did not carry, utterly belying this oft repeated mantra.
The reasons for this, the authors suggest, are manifold. "A gun may falsely empower its possessor to overreact, instigating and losing otherwise tractable conflicts with similarly armed persons. Along the same lines, individuals who are in possession of a gun may increase their risk of gun assault by entering dangerous environments that they would have normally avoided. Alternatively, an individual may bring a gun to an otherwise gun-free conflict only to have that gun wrested away and turned on them."
This result is not particularly unexpected. Prof David Hemenway of Harvard school of public health has published numerous academic investigations in this area and found that such claims are rooted far more in myth than fact. While defensive gun use may occasionally occur successfully, it is rare and very much the exception ? it doesn't change the fact that actually owning and using a firearm hugely increases the risk of being shot. This is a finding supported by numerous other studies in health policy, including several articles in the New England Journal of Medicine. Arguments to the contrary are not rooted in reality; the Branas study also found that for individuals who had time to resist and counter in a gun assault, the odds of actually being shot actually increased to 5.45 fold relative to an individual not carrying.
The problem goes deeper than this, however. There's good evidence that the very act of being in possession of a weapon has an unfortunate effect of making us suspect others have one too. This was shown in a 2012 paper by psychologists Prof Jessica Witt and Dr James Brockmole, where subjects were given either a replica gun or a neutral object and asked to identify the objects other people were holding.
Subjects in possession of a replica firearm were much more likely to identify a neutral object as a firearm. The erroneous assumption that someone else is armed can and does often end in tragedy.
Indeed, the evidence suggests the very act of being armed changes one's perception of others to a decidedly more paranoid one. Other studies have shown an element of racial priming too, where a black subject is more likely to be assumed to be carrying a weapon. Guns have a curious psychological effect beyond this: a 2006 study by Dr Jennifer Klinesmith and colleagues showed men exposed to firearms before an experiment had much higher testosterone levels and were three times more likely to engage in aggressive behaviour relative to the subjects not primed with a weapon.
LaPierre's proclamation bears the hallmarks of a litany of misconceptions. Gun aficionados often frame the debate in terms of protection, but it is vital to realise that the vast majority of rape and murder victims are not harmed by nefarious strangers, but by people they know, and often love ? friends, family members, lovers. Far from protecting people and keeping families safe, the sad truth is that firearms are often used in episodes of domestic violence. The John Hopkins centre for gun policy research has some sobering facts on this; women living in a home with one or more guns were three times more likely to be murdered; for women who had been abused by their partner, their risk of being murdered rose fivefold if the partner owned a gun.
Nor did guns make the women safer; women who purchased guns were 50% more likely to be killed by an intimate partner. So LaPierre's "good woman with a gun" is actually, it seems, putting herself in danger.
Viewed in this light, the NRA's insistence that rapes can be prevented with firearms or that teachers should be armed appear even more stupid than they already seemed. It is worth remembering that just as America leads the world in gun ownership, so too does it lead the world in gun homicide, with 11,000 to 12,000 murders committed by firearms each year. The tired old rationalisation that guns protect people is frankly contradicted by the evidence. The inescapable conclusion is that gun ownership makes everyone less safe. The logic the NRA espouses is perverse and transparently self-serving ? the solution to gun crimes is not more guns, and no amount of rhetorical dexterity can surmount this fact. If the US is to have a truly honest discussion about its gun culture, it needs to be rooted in fact rather than fantasy, and the sound and fury from the NRA should be dismissed with the contempt it deserves.
? Dr David Robert Grimes is a physicist and cancer researcher at Oxford University
Police investigating the stabbing of a Virginia state senator said on Tuesday they believe he was attacked by his son, who then appears to have shot himself dead.
The incident happened early on Tuesday morning at the home of Senator Creigh Deeds in Milboro, Virginia. Police said early indications suggest that he was set upon by his 24-year-old son, Gus.
Bleeding and injured from stab wounds to his head and body, Deeds, 55, walked down the hill from his home to a nearby highway, where he was spotted and picked up by a cousin who happened to be driving by.
The two drove to the cousin¡¯s house, where, at 7.25am, a 911 call was placed to the sheriff¡¯s office.?State troopers and Bath County deputies?arrived at the cousin's house to find Deeds stabbed multiple times about the head and upper torso. Other law enforcement officers arrived at the senator's house, where they found his 24-year-old son, Gus, gravely injured from a gunshot wound.
Senator Deeds was taken by ambulance to another relative¡¯s farm, where he was flown to the University of Virginia Hospital in Charlottesville for treatment. His condition was described as fair on Tuesday afternoon. Despite attempts to save his life, Gus Deeds died at his father's house.
"Troopers and Bath County deputies arrived to find Senator Deeds stabbed multiple times about the head and upper torso," said state police spokeswoman Corinne Geller. "He was flown from the scene to the University of Virginia hospital in Charlottesville, where he is right now ? and he's being treated for serious injuries."
"Senator Deeds' son, Gus Deeds, aged 24, also of Millboro, was found inside the residence suffering from life-threatening injuries associated with a gunshot wound. Despite efforts by state troopers and first responders there at the residence he died at the scene."
A spokeswoman for UVA medical center said Deeds's condition had been upgraded from critical to fair.
Deeds has served as a state senator since 2001. He?represents?Virginia¡¯s 25th district, which includes Albemarle County, Charlottesville, and Bath County, where Deeds lives.?Deeds lost to Bob McDonnell in the 2009 gubernatorial election. His son had been a student at the College of William and Mary, but had withdrawn last month.
In a statement,?governor McDonnell said his "thoughts and prayers are with the Deeds family". He added: "The news from this morning is utterly heartbreaking. Creigh Deeds is an exceptional and committed public servant who has always done what he believes is best for Virginia and who gives his all to public service.
"He cares deeply about Virginia, and the people of Virginia care deeply for him. I urge all Virginians today to join me in praying for a full and complete recovery for Creigh and for many more years of his public service to the commonwealth. At this moment, our state unites in prayer for Creigh Deeds and his family."
US senator Mark Warner, who represents Virginia, also?issued a statement.?"This morning¡¯s news from Bath County is just so heartbreaking," Warner said. "Senator Creigh Deeds has served his constituents and the Commonwealth with dedication and honor, and all of us are praying for him and his family at a tragic and very difficult time."
The College of William and Mary said Gus Deeds had withdrawn from the university last month. "William and Mary is very saddened to hear this tragic news,"?said director of university relations, Brian Whitson. "Gus Deeds was a member of the William and Mary community. He had been enrolled as a student at William and Mary since 2007, though not continuously. He withdrew from the college last month and was not currently enrolled at the time of his death. Our hearts go out to the entire Deeds family."
Preliminary figures show there have been more than 15,000 armed offences during 2000, up by almost 10 per cent over last year. The number of armed operations by police is also at a record level.
In October, police in Nottingham began carrying handguns in hip holsters while patrolling two notorious estates. The routine arming of officers came in response to a spate of 14 shootings by criminals.
'There is nothing exceptional,' Sean Price, Nottinghamshire's assistant chief constable, said. 'We are only doing what the police have always done - deploying the level of force appropriate to the threat.'
Manchester, notorious for its levels of gun crime in the early Nineties, is also seeing a dramatic rise in such offences. In a three-week period in September alone, seven people were shot, including a 16-year-old murdered while riding his bike through a park.
Although the use of firearms is a countrywide problem, it is most acute in the capital. In the past eight weeks there have been more than 35 reports of guns being fired illegally in London. The result: five deaths and 12 serious woundings.
At the beginning of this month, there were four separate shooting incidents in 24 hours. The most recent killing took place on Christmas Day when 29-year-old Steven Grant was shot in the head outside an East End nightclub.
Guns were once carried only to commit the most serious offences, but police now say they are increasingly used by small-time crooks such as burglars and low-level drug dealers. In London during November there were 21 cases of armed burglary and 71 muggings in which victims were threatened with guns. In the same month the capital saw arms used in 16 cases of grievous bodily harm and 77 other assaults. The figures also show that increasing numbers of petty criminals are carrying CS gas, supposedly to defend themselves.
The true figures could be even higher, because victims of many of the most violent gun crimes are reluctant to involve the authorities. Two weeks ago, police received calls from two separate hospital casualty departments in north London about young men with gunshot wounds. It was soon established that both were shot during the same incident in Canning Town earlier, but had fled the scene to seek treatment alone to try to lessen the risk of capture.
The use of guns outside the big towns and cities is rising too. Earlier this month shoppers were horrified to see two armed robbers shoot a security guard during a raid on a Securicor van in Hastings, East Sussex. The guard was wounded in the face and mouth.
On the same day as the Hastings shooting, archaeologists found human remains on a site near Bolam, Co Durham. The victim turned out to be 22-year-old career criminal Mark Corley who disappeared from his Lincolnshire home earlier this year. He had died from a gunshot wound.
A week earlier a man was shot dead in the tiny village of Woodleigh, in south Devon. It was the first firearms incident in the area for more than three years.
Gun crime is contributing to a higher number of murders in key areas, even though the national rate of killings this year has fallen. The rate in Scotland has jumped by 20 per cent.
Between 1997 and 1999 there were 429 murders in London, the highest two-year figure for more than 10 years. Reports of shots being fired or cars found riddled with bullets are increasingly common. Initiatives aimed at reducing the number of shootings have been set up in crime 'hotspots', including Hackney, Westminster, Lewisham and Brent.
Nationally, one murder in 20 is now carried out with a firearm. The number of illegally held guns is estimated at three million, a third more than at the time of the 1996 Dunblane massacre. As handguns can no longer be bought or sold legally, the police believe the vast majority of those coming on to the market have been smuggled from abroad. A small proportion of the machine guns involved are 'reactivated' versions of weapons which have supposedly been rendered harmless.
Gun murders are often linked to drugs. Although there have been police successes - particularly through Operation Trident, the initiative against drugs-related violence - such killings have a lower than average clear-up rate.
There are times when Dmitry Krymov's production, which draws parallels between the fate of European Jewry with that of artists living under the oppressive Soviet regime, seems less like theatre and more like alchemy. Buckets of paint thrown against a white cardboard wall mysteriously come alive. Holes are cut in the cardboard and the shapeless blobs are transformed into human shapes: the lost Jews of Europe. The wall bursts open and the entire theatre is filled with a blizzard of newsprint, every tiny torn scrap fluttering in the wind an unbearably poignant reminder of all those lost in the Holocaust.
There is so much loss in this visually stunning two and a half hours. A procession of ghosts are raised ? victims of fascism and communism. History always walks with a jackboot here: the sinister steps of an SS officer in the first half, Genealogy, are echoed in the second half, Shostakovich. The cardboard wall of Part One is glimpsed under a piano in Part Two as the composer tries desperately to escape his political collusion as the state turns on its artists. Medals pinned on chests suddenly resemble blood-splattered gunshot wounds; Shostakovich's own medal pierces his back, turning him into a wind-up clockwork toy, dancing to the tune of Mother Russia, represented by a monstrous outsized puppet with hard eyes and trigger-ready fingers.
It's all quite an experience. If the DIY approach to scenography sometimes affects the fluency of the evening, it also delivers something vivid and visceral. Pianos suddenly engage in a life-or-death game of dodgems in which the cacophony of metal crunching against metal drowns out the music; there is something infinitely touching in the way a simple flick of paint becomes a group of Jewish children, or a tiny pair of red shoes are made to walk.
It's not just the visuals that create the surreal sense that you have dropped into an alternate reality; the show sounds dreamily impressive too. A broom sweeping away the past at the very beginning becomes an aerial picking up the radio waves of history; the names of the dead are chanted like a litany; voices rise and fall. It uses stillness and silence brilliantly, as if it knows that it is in the apparent gaps between the words, the music and the performers' actions that the whispering dead can still be heard if we listen hard enough.
? Dmitry Krymov on creating Opus No 7: 'Chaos is a magnet'
Sergeant Simon Hamilton-Jewell, 41, Corporal Paul Long, 24, Corporal Simon Miller, 21, Corporal Russell Aston, 24, Lance Corporal Benjamin John McGowan Hyde, 23, Lance Corporal Benjamin Hyde, 23 and Lance Corporal Thomas Keys, 20, of 156 Provost Company, were killed by an Iraqi mob when reinforcements were a few hundred yards away, unaware of their predicament. All six men were felled by bullets from high-velocity rifles - probably Kalashnikovs - as they lay on the floor of a police station in the southern Iraqi town of Majar al-Kabir in June 2003.
Some relatives rushed from the coroner's court in Oxford yesterday as they learned how 21-year-old Corporal Miller had been punched around the face, hit in the chest with a rifle butt, shot in the head and the cheek from a distance and shot at point blank range in the chest. He had 24 other injuries, including grazing on his back indicating that he had been dragged across the ground.
The youngest, Cpl Keys, 20, clutched his knees to his abdomen in a foetal or sitting position before being shot in the head at close range, the inquest heard. He was shot 18 times, many times in the legs, and had 31 gunshot-related wounds as well as multiple cuts and bruises all over his body.
His father, Reg, quietly wept as he heard the details and was consoled by Cpl Miller's father, John . Home Office pathologist Nathaniel Cary apologised to the families because they had to hear his evidence in "such a deadpan style" but, he explained, it was of necessity. His colleague, Nicholas Hunt, refused to apologise to the families after they accused him of inappropriate behaviour by using photographs of three of the dead men during a seminar on how to set up temporary mortuaries in disaster zones. The coroner, Nicholas Gardiner, would not allow the families' solicitor, John MacKenzie, to question Dr Hunt over his use of the pictures. However, the brother of one of the dead servicemen later pursued Dr Hunt into the street to demand an apology on behalf of the grieving relatives.
"When do we get an apology? Why have you not approached the families?" asked Tony Hamilton-Jewell, brother of Sergeant Hamilton-Jewell. Dr Hunt replied: "It is regrettable but that is the advice I have been given and I do not want to go against that, as much as I would like to." In the slides displayed, the three fallen red caps' bodies were naked save for strips obscuring their genitals and faces.
Earlier, Dr Hunt told the inquest that Cpl Miller had a black eye and abrasions around his forehead and injuries on his chest "would have been consistent with being hit with the butt of a rifle or something similar".
Dr Cary described how Cpl Aston had 13 gunshot wounds to his torso, head, neck, arms, legs and cheek and that he was shot from different directions. His father, Mike Aston, asked if his son had been killed elsewhere and his body taken to the police station. Dr Cary said he could not answer that question.
Sgt Hamilton-Jewell was "struck by at least 14 bullets, at least nine had passed through the body and produced exit wounds". He was not shot at close range and there was nothing to suggest he had been beaten up or tortured. There were no head injuries. He had 15 other signs of injury, including bruising in the pubic area.
Outside court, Mr Keys said he was still unclear as to how his son died. "Nobody will ever know except the Iraqis who were in the room at the time. I just know that they would have seen them coming and known that they were going die. That's what's so difficult to come to terms with."
The General Medical Council confirmed later that it was "looking into" the families' claims regarding Dr Hunt's use of the pictures of the murdered Red Caps. A spokeswoman told the Press Association: "We can confirm that we have received information about Dr Hunt that we are looking at and currently considering."
The inquest was adjourned and is expected to resume today with pathology evidence into the deaths of Lance Corporal Hyde, and Corporal Paul Graham Long.
Legal action following the mass shooting at a Las Vegas concert is picking up with lawsuits filed on behalf of 14 concertgoers, including some who were shot or injured trying to escape and one woman who is so traumatized that she has since mistaken the sound of rain for gunshots.
The hotel-casino from where Stephen Paddock fired, concert organizers and the makers and sellers of a bump stock gun accessory that enabled him to fire rapidly are named as defendants. The court filings argue that they all share blame for the deadliest mass shooting in recent US history.
The 14 civil complaints, filed together on Wednesday in state court in Las Vegas, follow at least three others filed since Paddock opened fire on 1 October from the 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay hotel and casino, killing 58 people and injuring hundreds of others. The lawsuit seeks unspecific compensation for both ¡°physical and mental injuries¡±.
The challenge for mass shooting lawsuits is clearing a high legal bar to prove someone other than the shooter bears any responsibility. Such litigation typically drags for years and can end with victims and their families receiving little to nothing.
One of those suing, Elisha Seng, described in a phone interview haunting images she can¡¯t dispel ? of bullets thudding around her on the concert grounds and of turning to see a young woman covered in blood after being shot, clutching her throat and falling forward.
¡°I don¡¯t sleep at night and, when I do, I have nightmares,¡± said the 46-year-old from Bartlett, Illinois, just outside Chicago. Recently, as heavy rain began to fall outside overnight, she jumped up from her bed. ¡°I thought it was gunshots.¡±
Seng, who wasn¡¯t physically injured, returned to work as a sales representative, but said she quickly tires from her lack of sleep. Going to concert or sports halls can prompt flashbacks. She recently attended a Chicago Blackhawks game and found herself nervously calculating the best escape routes should someone open fire.
A Chicago law firm helped to prepare the filings, which include several plaintiffs from the Chicago area. Victims named in the suits also include a California man, Anthony Crisci, who was rushed to a hospital with a gunshot wound in a truck crowded with other victims.
Among deficiencies at the concert venue were poorly marked exits, Wednesday¡¯s filings say. And the hotel, it says, should have had gunfire-location devices that pinpoint where shots are coming from.
The 64-year-old Paddock, who killed himself just before his room was stormed, is also named in a bid to seize assets from his estate.
Paddock was able to use VIP status conferred on him as a high-stakes gambler to stockpile more than 20 rifles in his hotel suite, including by using exclusive access to a service elevator over days, the filings say. They argue what should have been routine checks of Paddock¡¯s bags and his room would have revealed his growing arsenal.
The filings name a leading bump stock maker, Texas-based Slide Fire Solutions, as a defendant. A lead attorney, Chicago-based Antonio Romanucci, said it wasn¡¯t yet clear which manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer made and sold the specific bump stock that Paddock used, but that the idea was to hold ¡°the entire supply chain¡± responsible. Messages seeking comment from Slide Fire were not returned.
MGM Resorts International, the parent company of Mandalay Bay, called the shooting ¡°a meticulously planned, evil ¡¦ act¡± in a statement on Wednesday and added that it would respond to any allegations only through ¡°the appropriate legal channels¡±. Live Nation, a concert organizer named in the filings, said in a statement it could not comment on pending litigation, but that the company remains ¡°heartbroken for the victims¡±.
Bump stocks were originally created ostensibly to make it easier for people with disabilities to shoot. But the filings allege that Slide Fire geared its marketing to regular gun owners who wanted their semi-automatic rifles to mimic fully automatic weapons.
Civil cases in mass shootings are becoming increasingly common.
Romanucci has also filed a lawsuit on behalf of victims of the Pulse nightclub shooting that killed 49 people last year in Orlando, Florida. It alleges, among other things, that a security firm that once employed gunman Omar Mateen knew Mateen was mentally unstable and had threatened violence, and should have alerted authorities. Mateen was killed in a shootout with police.
The 2007 Virginia Tech campus shooting in which Seung-Hui Cho killed 32 people illustrated the difficulties posed by such lawsuits. In 2013, the Virginia supreme court overturned a jury verdict siding with parents of two victims who claimed the state was negligent. A statement from the state attorney general¡¯s office at the time said the reversal showed what it had argued during years of litigation: ¡°Cho was the lone person responsible for this tragedy.¡± Cho killed himself after his rampage.
Most pop stars innovate every album cycle, a fraught hustle that is of a piece with this era¡¯s frantic audio production values. That¡¯s all beneath Lana Del Rey.
The ageless 32-year-old arrived at a languid sound, a detached authorial voice and a set of obsessions on her 2012 debut Born to Die, and her fourth album remains true to them all. One fine track sums up her entire oeuvre: the title of Summer Bummer reflects the consistently high mercury of Del Rey¡¯s mises-en-scene; and there is usually a worm at the centre of her perfect peach. The rhyme reflects the way all this glossy nihilism is often delivered with a wink.
At least three departures separate Lust for Life from its predecessors. One is the over-abundance of guests, a concession to modernity. The usual attendant menfolk ? rappers A$AP Rocky and Playboi Carti ? lend notional grit to Del Rey¡¯s ultra-glide. You might want to punch the air, however, when Stevie Nicks turns up on Beautiful People, Beautiful Problems ? Nicks¡¯s even, level delivery is so obviously a precursor to Del Rey¡¯s own. The title is almost self-parody; the rest, however, goes deeper than Del Rey songs usually do, combining a fetish for muscular blue-collar men with eco-fear.
It¡¯s not the only instance. A number of songs here step outside Del Rey¡¯s favourite theme ? wrongness, gilded ? and tackle the non-solipsistic. The second departure is that this is an album about America today. God Bless America ? and All the Beautiful Women in It wears its title like a pussy hat; gunshots punctuate the chorus.
The ghostly When the World Was at War We Kept Dancing invokes the 1940s while wondering: ¡°Is it the end of an era? Is it the end of America?¡± Del Rey surveys the crowd at Coachella and worries about their children, their children¡¯s children. ¡°I said a prayer for the third time,¡± she sighs. And we know what Del Rey¡¯s prayers are like nowadays ? in February she encouraged Twitter followers to join a nationwide congregation of witches to put a spell on the US president.
If this is an album about America, it is also an album about Americana, and other venerable source materials: the Coachella song is subtitled Woodstock in My Mind. Despite the rappers, the hip-hop content in Del Rey¡¯s sound mostly gives way to canonical genres ? the third departure.
Millennials might find a subscription to Uncut or Mojo useful here, as Del Rey drops retro bombs all over the place. ¡°Don¡¯t worry baby,¡± she croons on Love (Beach Boys). ¡°My boyfriend¡¯s back,¡± she notes on Lust for Life (the Angels), her strangely unsatisfying hook-up with the Weeknd, which borrows from Iggy Pop. It all gets a little ridiculous when Sean Ono Lennon consents to a Beatles pastiche called Tomorrow Never Came crammed with wide-ranging interpolations. ¡°Lay lady lay,¡± Del Rey sings, ¡°I would be your tiny dancer.¡± It¡¯s a mark of Lana Del Rey¡¯s persuasive skill that a good song emerges from under all that baggage. Girl meets boy. Boy fails to turn up when he said he would. Love goes wrong. Repeat till fade.
The fatal police shooting of an African American man by white officers in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, will be investigated by the US Department of Justice¡¯s civil rights division, after disturbing cellphone video of the incident emerged on Tuesday.
Thirty-seven-year-old Alton Sterling was shot dead after two officers wrestled him to the ground and appeared to open fire shortly after one officer held a gun near point-blank over Sterling¡¯s chest.
The eyewitness video, which went viral shortly after it was published, prompted peaceful protests on the streets of Baton Rouge on Tuesday evening.
Louisiana governor John Bel Edwards announced on Wednesday morning that the investigation into the shooting had been handed over to federal authorities, following calls from community leaders and members of Sterling¡¯s family for the federal government to intervene.The decision, a rare occurrence following officer-involved deaths, was welcomed by the parish¡¯s district attorney.
Edwards described the video as ¡°disturbing to say the least¡± and called for calm throughout the city.
¡°There should be no doubt in anybody¡¯s mind that this incident is going to be investigated impartially, professionally and thoroughly by the United States Department of Justice civil rights division.
¡°Hopefully when the community understands that, the tensions will ease and we will continue to press for calm and patience.¡±
Sterling¡¯s death is the latest in a line of police killings of African Americans in the US to capture national attention, the deaths of Eric Garner in New York and Walter Scott in South Carolina, both of which were captured on video by witnesses, sparked claims of racially biased policing throughout the United States.
At an emotional press conference on Wednesday morning, Sterling¡¯s 15-year-old son, Cameron, broke down in tears, and Sterling¡¯s partner, Quinyetta McMillan ? the boy¡¯s mother ? demanded justice for Sterling.
¡°He [Cameron] had to watch this as this was put all over the outlets,¡± she said, with reference to the cellphone video. ¡°As a mother I have now been forced to raise a son who is going to remember what happened to his father.¡±
¡°The individuals involved in his murder took away a man with children who depended upon their daddy on a daily basis,¡± she added, arguing he ¡°simply tried to earn a living to take care of his children¡±.
Baton Rouge police said in a statement that they had responded to a 911 call reporting Sterling had been selling CDs outside of a convenience store and had threatened the caller with a gun.In the cellphone video, one officer can be heard shouting ¡°He¡¯s got a gun. Gun,¡± shortly before shots ring out off-camera. The store¡¯s owner, Abdul Muflahi, told local news that one officer had first used a Taser on Sterling before the struggle occurred and that officers shot him ¡°four to six times¡±.Muflahi added that Sterling did not have the gun in his hands at the time the officers opened fire, but he witnessed police remove a firearm from his pocket after he was killed.
The East Baton Rouge coroner¡¯s office confirmed that Sterling died of multiple gunshot wounds to the back and chest.
At a press conference on Wednesday, Baton Rouge police chief Carl Dabadie named the two officers involved as 28-year-old Blane Salamoni, a four-year veteran of the department, and 29-year-old Howie Lake, a three-year veteran. Both have been placed on administrative leave but it remains unclear if both officers opened fire.
Local media reports indicate that Lake had been involved in a previous shooting in December 2014, when he and five other officers were placed on administrative leave after shooting a fleeing suspect who had shot at officers. The suspect survived the shooting.
Sterling had a criminal record, including a conviction for engaging in sexual intercourse with a juvenile, recorded in the year he turned 21.
But McMillan quickly dismissed reports detailing Sterling¡¯s criminal past. ¡°He is not what the mass media is making him out to be,¡± she said.
The incident sparked uproar on social media as Sterling¡¯s name trended on Twitter on Tuesday evening. In Baton Rouge around 200 people took to the streets on Tuesday night and vowed to protest outside the city hall on Wednesday.
Sterling¡¯s death marked the 558th fatal encounter involving US law enforcement officers in 2016, according to The Counted, the Guardian¡¯s nationwide investigation into police use of force. The project revealed that 1,146 people were killed by police in America in 2015, at a rate of over three fatalities a day. African American men aged between 15 and 34 were nine times more likely to be killed than any other demographic group.
There have been 11 officer-involved deaths in Louisiana so far this year, meaning the state has the 16th highest rate of fatal encounters in the US.
Jamira Burley, a campaign manager with Amnesty International USA, argued that the video evidence in Sterling¡¯s case should prompt state lawmakers to revise statues governing police use of lethal force in Louisiana.
¡°The use of lethal force in the US continues unabated due to inadequate laws and the lack of accountability for officers who are accused of using unnecessary or excessive force. Without reforms, there will be more deaths,¡± Burley said.
¡°According to international law, lethal force must only be used as an absolute last resort to prevent death or serious injury. Laws in Louisiana, and across the country, must be brought into line with international standards.¡±
Recognisably Gatsby, but certainly not great, this stage version of F Scott Fitzgerald's story aches with promise unfulfilled. The audience is encouraged to dress up 1920s style; there is alcohol served in jam jars, and Boston baked beans on the menu. You could be forgiven for thinking you had slipped back in time to a bootleg party circa 1922. Stand in Grace's Alley and peer through the window of Wilton's famous Mahogany Bar and you glimpse the past.
The exquisite Victorian music hall may not be the most appropriate fit for Long Island, but its rackety charm works its magic ? before the show and in the interval. It is the building and the peripherals that are the stars here, making Peter Joucia's awkward staging of his own limp version of the narrative seem like an afterthought, an inconsequential sideshow to the drinking and dancing, the?chance to dress up and take?photos.
Perhaps that's the point and it is our own 21st-century pursuit of pleasure, a mirror of Gatsby's gaudy parties, that is under the microscope here. If so, it doesn't come off: apart from some fine a?cappella singing, Joucia's production is so underpowered and lacking in texture that it is hard to make any connections, particularly when the narrative has been shorn of all symbolic power. It would be perfectly possible to exit the theatre none the wiser about what exactly is the?problem with Gatsby, Daisy and a post-first world war generation of American youth.
The cast is game, but they fight a losing battle with a staging where gunshots signal not tragedy but titters of laughter from the audience; their characters are barely drawn. The pre- and post-show trappings are fun; if you're looking for the elusive Gatsby, the lights are on but nobody is home.
The death of a brown-and-white, mixed breed named Bruno on the northern fringe of New Hampshire¡¯s White Mountains has sparked an angry response from animal rights activists who want to ban owners from using a gun to ¡°put down¡± old, sick or dangerous dogs.
¡°It was done in such a cruel manner. The dog was shot multiple times and left to die,¡± said Katie Treamer, one of the founders of Justice For Bruno, a group lobbying to make it a felony to shoot a pet to death in New Hampshire. ¡°In this day and age, it¡¯s just not a responsible way to euthanize a pet.¡±
A humanely placed bullet is a generations-old method of dispatching pets in rural parts of the country where a veterinarian¡¯s syringe can be expensive and hours away. And even those angry at how Bruno died say outlawing the practice isn¡¯t likely because it is so deeply ingrained in the nation¡¯s agrarian traditions, where farmers and ranchers have long put down domestic animals with a gunshot.
New Hampshire is among 27 states plus the District of Columbia that have no laws governing ¡°emergency euthanasia¡±, according to the American Veterinary Medical Association. Justice For Bruno has contacted state officials and its Change.org petition has more than 36,000 signatures in support of a new law.
State representative John Tholl, who lives in New Hampshire¡¯s north country and chairs the state house of representatives¡¯ public safety committee, said a ban on shooting a pet as a form of euthanasia faces long odds, especially in rural states.
¡°It¡¯s been common practice for people up here to put down their animals ? not just dogs ? because they¡¯re hurt in such a way that they can¡¯t be saved or they¡¯re so old that they need to be relieved of suffering,¡± Tholl said. ¡°And the cost to do that through a vet is quite expensive.¡±
The dog whose death prompted calls for new legislation, however, was not injured.
Bruno was found shot four times in September in the former timber city of Berlin. Bruno¡¯s owner, Ryan Landry, said in a Facebook posting he was forced to put down the year-and-a-half-old dog because it had bitten his children. Landry declined to be interviewed by the Associated Press.
Treamer said Landry had other options, including returning Bruno ? no questions asked ? to the shelter where he was adopted. If the dog truly was dangerous, then medical euthanasia administered by a trained professional would have been the preferred way to end Bruno¡¯s life, she said.
Maine¡¯s law is explicit: ¡°An animal may be shot if it is restrained in a humane way, it is performed by a highly skilled and trained person using a weapon that will produce instantaneous death by a single shot.¡± Several states allow law enforcement, veterinarians or animal welfare workers to shoot a pet if the animal is injured, sick or dangerous. In New York, ¡°no person shall euthanize any dog or cat by gunshot except as an emergency procedure for a dangerous dog or a severely injured dog¡±.
Tholl also says shooting is humane when done right.
¡°Let¡¯s face it, there are people who are qualified to put down an animal with one shot,¡± he said.
Growing up on a western Massachusetts farm, John Gralenski, now 80, sometimes had to put down sick or injured pets. He never liked it but he adamantly opposes outlawing the practice.
¡°I think they should have that right,¡± said Gralenski, who lives in rural Shelburne, on the New Hampshire-Maine line. ¡°When I was a kid, we always had dogs and if it was my dog and the dog got sick, there wasn¡¯t any money for a vet.¡±
Once he had to put a dog out of its misery after it got hit by a car and broke its hip.
¡°I was just a kid and it was my responsibility,¡± he said.
A decade ago, Gralenski adopted Zelda, a now-13-year-old beagle rescued in New Orleans after hurricane Katrina. He knows he¡¯ll eventually face a decision about how to put her down.
¡°Zelda and I are buddies,¡± he said. ¡°It¡¯s probably been 15 years since we had one (that needed to be put down). It does not get easier in your old age. I guess it depends on how I feel financially at the time.¡±
Joanne Bourbeau, the Vermont-based northeastern regional director for the Humane Society of the United States, acknowledged that enforcement might be difficult but just having a law on the books could serve as a deterrent.
¡°We would have a way to follow up,¡± she said. ¡°With the veterinary forensics we have now, it¡¯s very easy to prove that a crime was committed.¡±
Christopher Almy, district attorney in Maine¡¯s Penobscot and Piscataquis counties, said his office has prosecuted plenty of animal cruelty cases over his three decades of service but he couldn¡¯t recall bringing a case against someone for putting their pet down. One recent case focused on a woman who shot and killed her entire herd of 10 goats, though the cruelty charge stemmed from the condition of a couple of the goats, not the way they were killed.
For her part, Treamer says times have changed and there are far better ways to end a pet¡¯s life. She couldn¡¯t imagine such a death for Dozer, her 5-year-old pit bull-boxer mix.
¡°Just because that¡¯s the way it¡¯s always been done, that¡¯s not the way it should still be done,¡± she said.
It is a warm night in America¡¯s gambling capital and more than 22,000 country music fans of all ages, including children and teenagers, are in upbeat mood at the Las Vegas Village and Festival Grounds, run by MGM Resorts. It is the climax of the sold-out Route 91 Harvest festival, ¡°three days of country music on the Vegas Strip¡±. The singer Jason Aldean is beginning his set, overlooked by the two gold towers of the Mandalay Bay hotel, which has 3,309 rooms and a 135,000 sq ft casino.
Rapid fire rings out. At first, few realise the extent of the unfolding horror, assuming the sounds are part of the show. But as bullets continue to rain down, the music stops and Aldean rushes off stage. ¡°He literally dropped his guitar, threw it down and sprinted to the side,¡± a witness, Brian Claypool, told the MSNBC channel. ¡°A lot of people were still sitting in their seats. They didn¡¯t realise what was going on ¡¦ There was an onslaught of shots. It felt like it was world war three, like it would never end.¡±
William Walker, from Ontario, California, said: ¡°It sounded like something was wrong with the speakers. Jason Aldean kept playing through three rounds of it. Then once he stopped everyone took it more seriously.
¡°We were under a big spotlight and someone said: ¡®Turn off the light.¡¯ They shut it off and you could see and hear bullets hitting the ground. People piled up behind cop cars, and ex-military guys were saying, ¡®Give me a gun, I¡¯m going to get these fuckers.¡¯¡±
Bullets hit concertgoers and spark off the pavement. People scream and duck for cover, fall on top of each other or run for their lives; witnesses see people fall dead in front of them. Split-second decisions make the difference between life and death. The country singer Jake Owen, who was on a side stage, told CNN that for the attacker, it was like ¡°shooting fish in a barrel¡±.
Police get the first call reporting the shooting. According to the New York Times, video captured nine seconds of rapid, continuous bursts of fire, followed by 37 seconds of silence and panicked screaming from the crowd. Gunfire then erupted again in at least two more bursts, both shorter than the first.
There is a stampede and carnage. Megan Kearney told NBC: ¡°People started screaming that they were hit and to get down and then about every 20 seconds after that you would hear a round of machine guns and people just dropping; I mean hundreds of bodies all over the ground.¡±
Jackie Hoffing, her eyes glassy, still in a clear state of trauma, said: ¡°It was hysteria. There were people trampled. We jumped walls, climbed cars, ran for our lives. I¡¯ve never run that hard or been that scared in my whole life.¡±
Desiree Price, from San Diego, said: ¡°Two girls hid behind a car with us, right outside the concert. We huddled together. That¡¯s why I have their blood on me. One girl was shot in her leg, the other had it in her shoulder. It didn¡¯t stop so we all ran ? we kept going.¡±
There are acts of heroism from concertgoers and first responders treating the wounded despite continued gunfire. More than a hundred people are taken to the University Medical Center in ambulances and cars. They include four who died and 12 in critical condition.
Taking cover under a table, Kevin Kropf, from Orange County, California, waited until tactical police units came in. ¡°I didn¡¯t want to get up because I didn¡¯t want to get mistaken for a bad guy and get shot. I saw a couple people on the street covered up with sheets, and them loading one girl into the back of a truck. She was definitely dead ¡¦ she looked to be in her mid-20s and whoever she was with, her husband, was in the back of the truck too. He was a mess.¡±
Among the dead is Sonny Melton of Paris, Tennessee. His widow, Heather Gulish Melton, told WZTV: ¡°He saved my life and lost his.¡±
The streets between the concert grounds and the nearest medical center are a non-stop convoy of ambulances and police. Reports of gunmen and shootings at other hotels circulate on Reddit and Twitter, adding to the chaos and panic. Survivors keep emerging from apartment buildings, motels, parking garages and other emergency shelters. They have nowhere to go, since the Strip remains on lockdown.
Jackie Hoffing said: ¡°We¡¯ve been in the Motel 6. We had stopped in the lobby and thought we were safe, but then they came in and said, ¡®The suspect is here. Everybody has to run.¡¯ It was another stampede. We knocked on a random door and went in there ? about 15 of us ? and hid in the bathroom for two and a half hours. I was texting my children. I thought we were going to die. I told them: ¡®I love you.¡¯¡±
Seventy-two minutes after the first call to police, several Swat teams are sent to the 32nd floor of the the Mandalay Bay hotel and, using explosives, get inside the attacker¡¯s room. Stephen Paddock, 64, of Mesquite, Nevada, is dead, apparently from a self-inflicted gunshot. Police say he has at least 10 rifles in the room and has been staying there since 28 September. His motive remains unknown.
At least 59 people have been killed ? the deadliest mass shooting in American history ? and more than 500 injured.
Most of the famous Vegas strip, including Caesars Palace, is locked down. Flashing red and blue lights from countless ambulances and police cars nearly outshine the casino towers on the strip. At the Rebel gas station behind the MGM Grand, survivors stand teary-eyed and shocked. Some make calls to their families. They wonder where they will go. Many have rooms in hotels under lockdown, blockaded by law enforcement.
Police search Paddock¡¯s house in Mesquite, a town on the Nevada-Arizona border.
Donald Trump, facing his first major mass shooting, tweets: ¡°My warmest condolences and sympathies to the victims and families of the terrible Las Vegas shooting. God bless you!¡±
Trump makes a statement at the White House, describing the attack as ¡°an act of pure evil¡± and announcing that he will visit Las Vegas on Wednesday. ¡°In moments of tragedy and horror, America comes together as one,¡± says the president, who has proved a divisive figure on many issues.
Paddock¡¯s brother Eric, who lives in Orlando, says he is ¡°completely dumbfounded¡± by the shooting. ¡°We can¡¯t understand what happened,¡± Eric says. ¡°He¡¯s not an avid gun guy at all. The fact that he had those kind of weapons is just ? where the hell did he get automatic weapons? He has no military background or anything like that.¡±
The suspect in the Las Vegas shooting that has left at least 59 people dead had amassed an arsenal that included more than 40 firearms, police said on Monday night, as officials declared a state of emergency for the county encompassing the Las Vegas strip.
Authorities found 23 guns, including a handgun, in the hotel room of the gunman, identified earlier by police as 64-year-old Stephen Paddock. At least some were equipped with scopes, devices that help the shooter identify targets at a range, police said.
They also recovered 19 firearms plus explosives and several thousand rounds of ammunition from Paddock¡¯s home in Mesquite, Nevada, a town near the border with Arizona, Joe Lombardo, the Las Vegas police sheriff, said. He also said police found ¡°electronic devices¡± but would not describe them.
Several pounds of ammonium nitrate, a material used to make explosives, were also found in Paddock¡¯s car. Later on Monday, a Swat team searched a residence in northern Nevada believed to be associated with the gunman.
At an afternoon news conference, officials also updated the latest casualty figures, saying that at least 59 people were dead and 527 more injured. The gunman opened fire from the 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay hotel on the thousands of concertgoers attending the Route 91 country music festival on Sunday night.
Islamic State on Monday claimed that the gunman was ¡°a soldier of the Islamic State¡±, but authorities have said that there was no evidence to substantiate that claim and that the group had falsified its role in attacks.
The shooting turned an American city known for its nightclubs and casinos into a war zone as thousands of concertgoers ran for cover from the bullets pouring down on them. The attack was the latest in a grim list of mass shootings, and the carnage surpassed the death toll at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando in June 2016, when 49 people were killed.
The first reports of the shooting came just after 10pm local time, as the country music star Jason Aldean, one of the festival¡¯s final performers, played. As the bullets began to spray the crowd, Aldean stopped playing and ran off stage, prompting chaos in the crowd.
¡°They¡¯re thinking it¡¯s fireworks or it¡¯s part of the technology of the music being played. They were thinking it¡¯s coming from different areas,¡± Carolyn Goodman, the mayor of Las Vegas, said at the press conference.
At least 527 people were injured ? some were wounded by gunshots and shrapnel while others were trampled or hurt trying to jump fences and flee the site, police said.
In pursuit of the gunman, officers scoured the hotel floor by floor until arriving at Paddock¡¯s suite, Lombardo said. Paddock engaged officers through his hotel room door, injuring a security guard in the leg, he said. The guard is expected to recover. Swat officers then broke down the door and swarmed the room, where they found Paddock dead.
¡°We believe the individual killed himself prior to our entry,¡± the sheriff told reporters.
In Washington, Donald Trump called the attack an ¡°act of pure evil¡±. He said he planned to visit Las Vegas on Wednesday and ordered the flags to be lowered to half-mast. In a response that has become a ritual, Democrats demanded lawmakers take action on gun control measures they believe will prevent ? or at least reduce the number of casualties ? of a future mass shooting, while Republicans blamed them for politicizing the moment.
In Clark County, the coroner¡¯s office worked to identify the victims and notify families, as residents wound around blocks to donate blood for the survivors. A number of evening vigils were planned around the city as donations and well-wishes poured in from around the country in support of the victims and their families.
By late Monday night, police said they still had no idea what motivated a retired accountant with no criminal history to carry out this attack.
Lombardo said Paddock appeared ¡°reclusive¡± but cautioned that authorities were still combing through his background. The sheriff said it was possible that the gunman had attended a three-day music festival called Life is Beautiful in downtown Las Vegas one week ago.
He also said Marilou Danley, whom he described as Paddock¡¯s girlfriend, was currently in Tokyo and that police intended to talk to her when she returns.
A brother of the suspect living in central Florida, Eric Paddock, told CBS he was ¡°dumbfounded¡±. He was ¡°not an avid gun guy at all¡±, the brother said. ¡°The fact that he had those kind of weapons is just ¡¦ he has no military background or anything like that.¡±
Angelique Caro was pulled from the Pulse nightclub with her right arm shattered. Another round from Omar Mateen¡¯s assault rifle had torn through a lung and settled underneath her collarbone. She was dazed and unable to move, she remembers, when somebody picked her up and carried her to safety. She pleaded with paramedics to stay with her in the ambulance.
As a survivor of the attack three weeks ago that killed 49 and wounded 53, Caro knows she is fortunate to have her life despite the devastating wounds she received.
Yet by his choice of weapon, a semiautomatic Sig Sauer MCX rifle, and particularly the high-velocity .223 caliber ammunition designed to cause maximum trauma to the human body, Mateen condemned Caro and many like her to months, years and in some cases a lifetime of suffering.
¡°They¡¯ve told me right now it could be up to four months,¡± said the 28-year-old airline customer service agent of her physical recovery. It will require lengthy and expensive therapy sessions several times a week and frequent follow-up appointments with doctors at the Orlando regional medical center (ORMC), where Caro was operated on and spent the first five days after the 12 June shooting.
¡°Emotionally, I¡¯m trying to take it one day at a time,¡± she said. ¡°I have my days where some are better than others. I¡¯m still emotional about everything, and still I¡¯m trying to deal with the pain from the injuries.¡±
The scale of the devastation wrought by Mateen during the worst mass shooting in US history can be directly attributed to the ammunition he used, experts say. Although the exact type of round has not been publicly identified by the FBI, it is clear that Mateen chose the high muzzle velocity rifle for ultimate impact, presenting civilian medical staff with challenges more familiar to those treating battlefield casualties.
¡°The injuries are much more complex. They¡¯re much more difficult to repair,¡± said Dr Michael Cheatham, chief surgical quality officer at ORMC and one of a seven-strong team of surgeons who worked around the clock in the first hours after the attack, to save and stabilize dozens of victims.
¡°We take care of a lot of gunshot wounds as a level one trauma center,¡± Cheatham added, ¡°and have had 20 more victims unrelated to the Pulse event just in the last two weeks, so it¡¯s something we see fairly frequently.
¡°[But] the bullet wounds that were sustained in the Pulse event were clearly different. The energy behind the bullet is much greater and the speed of the bullet is much greater, so as a result, when that bullet hits tissue, it tends to cause a blast effect, sending out shockwaves.
¡°The wounds we saw in these victims tended to be much more severe. Instead of a fracture, it was a severe fracture; instead of just a bruised or contused lung, these were lung injuries to a much greater magnitude.
¡°Two patients were on ventilators for a long time as a result of their injuries and their fractures. Their scapulae required very complex repair by our orthopaedic surgeons, whereas a lower-caliber weapon might just have caused a fracture that eventually would heal on its own and not require surgery.¡±
In Caro¡¯s case, doctors considered her arm injury at least as severe as the lung wound, largely because of the extensive damage, complexity of repair and length of rehabilitation. She said feeling was only just beginning to return this week, almost three weeks after she was shot.
¡°I¡¯m able to move my fingers a lot more, and feel people touching them,¡± she said. ¡°The skin graft¡¯s starting to heal from the outside in, so that¡¯s doing a little better.¡±
Cheatham pointed to the velocity of the round as the decisive factor.
¡°The bullets tend to tumble once they hit something, especially bone,¡± he said. ¡°They will glance off the bone and they will start tumbling in random patterns. Again, that blast effect causes much greater tissue injury than a lower-velocity bullet that has less energy behind it.¡±
As of Friday afternoon, only four of the 53 hurt in the shooting remained in hospital, authorities said, one of them still in critical condition. But each released patient is only at the beginning of a lengthy journey of recovery, emotional and physical, which for some might never be over.
¡°This is not an event that goes away quickly. It¡¯s a huge issue unfolding for these survivors, many of whom are going to have lifelong significant disabilities and pain,¡± said Dr Stephen Hargarten, chair of the department of emergency medicine at the Medical College of Wisconsin and a renowned gun violence researcher.
While the precise type of round that caused such extensive damage to those wounded in Orlando has yet to be determined, Hargarten said: ¡°In a relative sense, it doesn¡¯t really matter. They¡¯re all pretty effective at delivering lethal amounts of kinetic energy. It happens quickly and it¡¯s effectively delivered because of the high velocity, so it inflicts maximum injury.¡±
He is concerned about the widespread availability of such lethal ammunition and believes there should be a renewed national debate, recalling 1990s controversy over the Black Talon range of hollow-point ammunition, which was discontinued by manufacturer Winchester. On impact with human tissue, Black Talon bullets would expand into razor sharp petals ? designed, according to a police ballistics expert at the 2014 trial of athlete Oscar Pistorius for the murder of his girlfriend Reeva Steenkamp, to ¡°cut through the organs of a human being¡±.
¡°We have had some of those discussions but haven¡¯t had recent rational discussions like leadership of civil society ought to have,¡± Hargarten said. ¡°Policymakers ought to have the best information and highest-quality research possible in order to make the best-informed decisions.¡±
Hospital authorities in Orlando say they have not yet begun to tally what will certainly be a sizable cost for treating the wounded of the Pulse attack.
Ted Miller, an economist who researches the cost of crime at the Pacific Institute for Research and Evaluation, has estimated medical bills for those killed and injured at more than $4m. Miller said money raised by the public to support victims of the Pulse shooting would ¡°certainly cover all the medical expenses¡±, assuming it was not dedicated elsewhere.
¡°What¡¯s not in those costs are the mental healthcare costs for the people who were in the club but were not physically wounded,¡± Miller said.
Nor does it include the cost of mental healthcare for first responders or families who may have lost loved ones, or lost wages, jobs, quality of life or economic productivity. Add those costs, Miller calculates, and the impact of Mateen¡¯s attack in Orlando rockets to $385m.
In Kissimmee, Caro is recovering at home in the care of her parents, William and Maribel. She is also supported by what she says is a strong group of friends, and is not ready to start worrying about the longer-term costs of regaining her health.
¡°I¡¯m just grateful for the awesome, amazing care I received,¡± she said. ¡°They saved my life.
¡°I¡¯m focused on getting better ? I¡¯m not thinking about that right now. I spend a lot of time by myself in my room, not to be overwhelmed by everybody. [But] the support has been amazing. It¡¯s great to know everyone cares and is there for me. I know there will be good days and bad days.¡±
Latin America may be the most murderous continent on Earth, but huge improvements in public safety have been achieved in several major cities, according to a new homicide map of the world that is being launched this week.
Several metropolises that were once bywords for violent death ? such as Medellin, Bogota, Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro ? have seen murder rate declines of more than 60% over the past two decades thanks to improved living standards, better education, decelerating urbanisation and more effective policing, say the researchers behind the Homicide Monitor.
But while overall figures are falling, the map reveals that murders are stubbornly concentrated in poor communities, and the victims are mostly young ? usually black or mixed-race ? men.
The Monitor is an interactive online world map with data on the distribution of murder by country, year, age of victim and ? where figures are available ? gender and type of weapon. Drawing on statistics from the United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime, government offices, health institutes and police records, the authors also include a detailed city- and state-level breakdown for Latin America, the worst-affected region.
It has been compiled as a tool for policymakers and researchers by the Igarape Institute, a Rio thinktank with funding from the Open Society Foundation and Peace Research Institute Oslo.
The map reveals that a third of the world¡¯s 450,000 murders each year occur in Central and South America and the Caribbean, though the region is home to less than a tenth of the population. Fourteen of the top 20 countries in a ranking of murder rates are in Latin America.
The countries with highest death rates in relation to number of inhabitants are Honduras, El Salvador and Venezuela. Excluding war zones, Brazil has the most murders overall, with 56,337 homicides in 2012, the most recent year with figures for all countries.
While the figures theoretically means a person is 25 times more likely to be murdered in Brazil than in the UK, the detailed mapping of trends and murder ¡°hot spots¡± shows the risks for most people are falling.
Media reports ahead of the Rio 2016 Olympics have made much of Brazil¡¯s deadly crime problem.
But according to Robert Muggah, the Canadian founder of the Igarape Institute, the data shows that murder victims in Brazil are more likely to be young black men than rich foreign tourists.
¡°Violence is not evenly distributed around the world, much less in Brazil. It tends to be highly concentrated,¡± said Muggah. ¡°The perception in many cities that everyone is equally at risk is flat-out wrong. In many US cities, for example, less than 5% of street addresses account for 75% of violence. In Bogota, just 2% of street addresses are where 98% of homicides occur.¡±
He noted that the urban zones most susceptible to sudden outbreaks of violence are usually fast-growing, poorly regulated areas, often with high population densities and large numbers of new arrivals. Unlike longer-established downtown neighbourhoods, these communities are often a low priority for local governments and police chiefs.
The Homicide Monitor plans to include essays from leading criminologists and other experts on the methods that have been most effective in reducing killings. High among them is ¡°hot spot¡± policing ? the deployment of large numbers of officers to areas with high murder rates. Thanks to this and greater efforts to involve local communities in public security decision-making, Sao Paulo saw its homicide rate fall dramatically from 42.2 per 100,000 people in 2000 to 13.9 per 100,000 in 2010.
Problems remain, however. Police killings are still alarmingly high and there is pressure from influential commercial districts and wealthy neighbourhoods to have more police protection. Similar ¡°enclave mentalities¡± are undermining efforts to ¡°pacify¡± favelas in Rio because elites in the most upmarket communities would rather have police protecting their homes than reducing crime at its source. Contrarily, in poorer regions of Brazil, particularly the north-east, resources are low and homicide rates continue to be alarmingly high.
The national government has been slow to act. Although murder is the leading cause of death for Brazilians between the ages of 15 and 29, national funding for reducing homicide and violent crime has plummeted since 2011 and there is no federal programme to support the most-affected states.
¡°In Brazil there is no national homicide strategy, which is not what you would expect considering 56,000 people are dying violently every year,¡± said Muggah. ¡°It is a disproportionately modest response to an enormous problem.¡±
While the trend in wealthy countries and cities is for a steady fall in murder rates, the map illustrates the considerable challenges that remain in many parts of the world. The Homicide Monitor database will be expanded to include more detailed figures from Africa. The authors also plan to launch public media campaigns in countries such as Honduras with high levels of homicide.
The cliched advice with so many computer problems is to turn the machine off and then on again; the laptop that offended the Israeli border police has certainly been turned off but is very unlikely ever to fire up again.
The laptop belonged to an American student, Lily Sussman, who had been travelling widely in the Middle East and, a fortnight ago, was crossing into Israel at Taba after a stay in Cairo.
According to her blog the security guards spent two hours questioning her, hand-checking every single item in her luggage, and questioning her about whether she had an Arab, Palestinian or Egyptian boyfriend. They checked images on her camera ? which included anti-Israeli graffiti ? and asked about the map of Jerusalem drawn for her by a friend.
She then heard an announcement "along the lines of 'do not to be alarmed by gunshots because the Israeli security needs to blow up suspicious passenger luggage.'"
She rushed to check her unattended luggage, left where she had been instructed, and was relieved to find it untouched. "Moments later a man came outside and introduced himself as the manager on duty. And then, 'I'm sorry but we had to blow up your laptop.'"
The laptop had not so much been blown up as executed by firing squad, its screen shattered by three bullets.
According to the Haaretz newspaper, the Israeli airport authorities responded: "A check performed on the lady's luggage signalled the need for security personnel to follow procedure."
The hard disk survived, and Sussman hopes to win compensation. However, many comments on her blog post were startlingly hostile. Mike Hunt wrote: "To hell with this pathetic wretch and her ventilated Macbook, she is a whiny little wannabe who should go back to Egypt get a netbook and have a nice day sympathising for the poooooor Palestinians." Others suggested it was her own fault for using a Mac instead of a PC.
Fatal shootings by police in Minnesota and Louisiana have revived protests about the treatment by officers of black Americans who appear to be carrying firearms legally or unthreateningly.
Philando Castile was shot dead by an officer in St Paul, Minnesota, late on Wednesday as demonstrations continued 1,100 miles away in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, over the killing by police of Alton Sterling. Both incidents were partially captured on cellphone video.
Castile¡¯s girlfriend stated on camera that the 32-year-old school cafeteria supervisor was shot after informing an officer at a traffic stop that he was carrying a pistol and was licensed to do so.
Sterling, 37, appeared to have a pistol inside his pocket when he was fatally shot during a struggle with two officers.
Their deaths are the latest in a series of controversial cases including those of Tamir Rice and John Crawford, two young African Americans who were separately shot dead by police in Ohio in 2014 while handling pellet guns in a park and a Walmart store respectively. In both cases, officers fired within seconds of seeing them.
Campaigners said African Americans were treated unfairly to deadly effect. ¡°No matter how well you follow the rules, you can still be dead because you¡¯re black,¡± said Brittany Packnett, an activist and former member of Barack Obama¡¯s White House policing taskforce. ¡°Compliance has never guaranteed our safety.¡±
Jack Miller, a press aide to Hillary Clinton¡¯s presidential campaign in New Jersey, said ¡°second amendment purists¡± ought to speak out in support of African American gun owners. ¡°A white man with a gun is ¡®exercising his rights¡¯, yet a black man just suspected of having a gun is a deadly threat,¡± said Miller.
Castile¡¯s case appears the more obviously troubling of this week¡¯s high-profile shootings, according to the account given by his girlfriend, Diamond Reynolds. She alleged that an officer who stopped the couple for driving with a broken tail-light opened fire on Castile after Castile reached for his identification. Castile had warned the officer he had a pistol and said he was licensed to carry it, she said.
Minnesotans may carry a handgun ? openly or concealed ? if they hold a permit issued by their county sheriff¡¯s office. To obtain a permit, applicants must be 21 or older and have a training certificate from a registered instructor. People who have been convicted of certain violent crimes or who are listed in the state¡¯s ¡°criminal gang investigation system¡± are barred from obtaining permits.
Police in the state have been accused of persecuting licensed black gun owners before. In 2012, Zachary King said he was violently beaten by five Minneapolis officers and jailed for carrying a gun legally while walking to his car. Charges against King were dropped and the city paid him a $122,000 settlement.
Under Minnesota law, police officers may use deadly force to protect themselves or others ¡°from apparent death or great bodily harm¡±.
The officer who shot Castile works for the small department of St Anthony, whose 23 officers are also contracted to patrol the Falcon Heights location of the shooting. St Anthony police chief John Ohl said in his 2015 annual report: ¡°People who have never seen cops¡¯ everyday reality up close can easily overlook just how difficult it can be to deal humanely, as cops must, even with the dregs of our society.¡±
The report suggested that St Anthony officers received an average of 67 hours of training last year, including on de-escalation, the use of force, and firearms. Lt Jeff Scholl wrote that his officers ¡°find it a little odd¡± to be taught about diversity.
In Louisiana, gun owners may freely ¡°open carry¡± a visible firearm. A permit is required, however, for concealing a gun in one¡¯s pocket, as Sterling appeared to be doing during his confrontation with police in Baton Rouge.
To qualify for a permit, an applicant must complete safety training and not have been found guilty of a violent or drug-related crime in the prior five years, along with other restrictions. It is unclear whether Sterling held a permit or would have qualified for one, having historic felony convictions. A spokeswoman for the Louisiana state police said the agency would not divulge whether or not Sterling was a permit holder.
Sterling, a 37-year-old father of five, was approached by officers early on Tuesday morning after police received reports of a man matching his description pointing a gun at someone outside a convenience store. Video appears to show police unsuccessfully attempt to use a Taser on Sterling before one of the officers tackled him to the ground.
After the second officer joined in, the three men can be seen struggling for a moment before a voice can be heard yelling: ¡°He¡¯s got a gun.¡± The officer visible in the video draws his weapon and points it at Sterling¡¯s upper body. Someone can be heard yelling: ¡°You fucking move, I swear to God...¡± moments before several gunshots can be heard and the camera points away from the scene.
A first video, which was widely shared online, prompted peaceful protests on the streets of Baton Rouge. Authorities announced that the investigation into the shooting would be handled by federal authorities.
A second video, which emerged on Wednesday, appears to show one officer removing a weapon from Sterling¡¯s pocket after the gunshots were fired. That video also shows that Sterling did not have the weapon in his hand at any point during the scuffle, but whether one of his hands were or could have been reaching for it remains an elusive and critical variable.
¡°If the gun is in the person¡¯s pocket and they have no way to access it, no, the shooting would likely not be justified,¡± said John DeCarlo, a 34-year veteran of police work and an associate professor of criminal justice at the University of New Haven. ¡°But when the gun becomes a threat, that changes the whole equation.¡±
Marq Claxton, a retired 20-year New York police department veteran and director of the Black Law Enforcement Alliance, said the Sterling video did not provide enough information to determine whether officers acted reasonably.
¡°What I saw in the video was disturbing and troubling,¡± he said. ¡°However, there are too many variables at this point to commit to one position on whether or not the police officer acted appropriately.¡±
The Baton Rouge police rulebook states ¡°the protection of human life¡± as the first priority of the department and that it is the ¡°responsibility of all employees to use reasonable judgement in all circumstances where deadly force may be employed.¡± Police are instructed that they must ¡°never employ unnecessary force or violence¡±.
Claxton said if there was a level of confidence in policing in black communities, the reaction might have unfolded differently. ¡°We would give some leeway if we trusted in [the police¡¯s] objectivity. Now we¡¯re in a climate where all that rightfully must be questioned.¡±
According to Claxton, when citizens who conceal carry are engaged by police, ¡°the responsibility of the permit holder is to, upon contact with law enforcement, immediately notify them that you are armed.¡±
DeCarlo added: ¡°Whether it¡¯s open carry or concealed carry, whether they are carrying legally or illegally, basically once the weapon becomes a threat, the officer acts accordingly.¡±
Former MLB player Darryl Hamilton, a standout center fielder and a member of the New York Mets team that reached the 2000 World Series, was killed in a murder-suicide in a suburban Houston home, authorities said Monday.
Hamilton was found Sunday after he was fatally shot in a house in Pearland. He was 50 and had worked for the MLB Network since 2013.
An initial investigation determined Hamilton was shot several times and that a woman in the home died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound. She was identified as 44-year-old Monica Jordan, Pearland Police Lt Patrick Savage said. Police said the 14-month old child of Hamilton and Jordan was found unharmed at the home.
Hamilton, who was born in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, played for five teams over 13 seasons in the majors before retiring in 2001. He reached the postseason in four of his final five seasons.
He had a career batting average of .291 in 1,328 games with Milwaukee (1988, 1990-95), Texas (1996), San Francisco (1997-98), Colorado (1998-99) and the Mets (1999-2001). He batted left, but threw with his right arm and had a career fielding percentage of .995 with only 14 errors in 2,770 defensive chances.
In Hamilton¡¯s only season with the Rangers, they made the playoffs for the first time in franchise history after winning the AL West title. He also went to the postseason with the Giants and two consecutive years in New York.
Hamilton later worked in operations for the commissioner¡¯s office and for baseball¡¯s digital arm, MLB Advanced Media.
¡°All of us at Major League Baseball are shocked and saddened by this tragedy,¡± Commissioner Rob Manfred said in a statement. ¡°He was a talented and personable individual, and we were proud to call him a member of the baseball family. On behalf of Major League Baseball, I extend my deepest sympathies to Darryl¡¯s family and his many friends throughout our game.¡±
The Mets mourned the loss and said they planned to hold a moment of silence before Friday night¡¯s home game to honor both Hamilton and Nelson Doubleday Jr, their former owner who died last week at the age of 81.
The Rangers praised Hamilton as well and singled out his ¡°memorable¡± year in Texas.
¡°He was not only an offensive catalyst and defensive standout on the field but also was a club leader and an outstanding team-mate,¡± said the team, who planned a moment of silence before Tuesday night¡¯s home game against Oakland.
Brewers general manager Doug Melvin said the team was stunned by the tragedy, ¡°something that is impossible for us to even begin to comprehend.¡±
¡°Darryl was a wonderful player for our organization, but more importantly, he was a true gentleman and a great friend to many here,¡± said Melvin, who was with Texas during Hamilton¡¯s lone season with the Rangers.
Police responded to the home Sunday afternoon after receiving a 911 call. Hamilton¡¯s body was found near the home¡¯s main entry, while Jordan¡¯s body was located in another area of the house, Savage said. Autopsies on both were pending and Savage said the investigation was ongoing.
Adam Lanza forced his way into Sandy Hook elementary school on 14 December 2012 at about 9.30am, armed with two handguns and an assault rifle. He shot and killed 26 people?? 20 children and six adults ??before apparently turning the gun on himself. Connecticut police on Saturday released a full list of names of his victims.
The Guardian has corrected the spellings of some names where it was possible to check against official records. Some others may be subject to later update.
A British construction worker was murdered by his kidnappers just minutes after a joint UK and Nigerian rescue operation stormed into the compound where he was held, an inquest has heard.
Chris McManus, a quantity surveyor from Oldham, was shot six times in a toilet ? both through the door and then from just outside it ? as special forces tried to save his life, but they were under AK-47 fire from the kidnappers at the compound in the north-west Nigerian city of Sokoto.
The hearing in Salisbury heard the soldiers stormed the building on 8 March last year after intelligence in previous days told them that McManus, 28, was there with fellow captive Franco Lamolinara from Italy, who also died during the rescue.
The go-ahead for the operation had been given by Cobra, the government's crisis committee, at 11.15am, just 45 minutes before it started, after a senior officer had reviewed the evidence amid fears for the men's safety.
The team, which included British special forces, had been sent to the area the previous day and burst through the compound's front gates at midday local time on 8 March last year, senior investigating officer Detective Chief Inspector Grant Mallon said.
The soldiers were soon under small arms fire; Mallon said the weapon was an AK-47 with its distinctive "crack" sound. The men killed at least one militant and then Mallon said they heard further shots with the same distinctive crack in the north-west area of the compound.
"Muffled gunshots were heard by the team in sector one in the north-west corner of the compound. They were from a high calibre weapon. It seemed to them they were in a room and it was rapid shots.
"Two insurgents were then seen leaving the compound from the north on a ladder at 12.04," the policeman said.
The soldiers then systematically went through the compound until they came to the north-west end of the compound and found some tarpaulin obscuring a building.
The men saw single beds and a room with a barred window. They then went into another room with a single and double bed and saw a Manchester United football shirt similar to one McManus had been wearing in videos released by his captors in the months before his death.
"They called out for Franco and Chris but received no reply," Mallon said.
"To the right there was a metal door to a toilet and they noticed there were bullet holes to it and the team noticed there were 7.62mm munitions and cases on the floor.
"The door was partially open and when the soldiers looked inside they could see two white males on the floor and they immediately recognised them as Chris and Franco. Chris was lying to the left of the toilet. Both men had visible gunshot wounds. It appears they were killed fairly quickly into the engagement."
McManus was pronounced dead at 1.38pm local time by a doctor.
A postmortem examination found that he died from a single gunshot wound to the head from a 7.62mm round that killed him almost instantly, the hearing was told. "Friendly fire" was ruled out because the rescue forces were using 5.56mm munitions.
The men had been kidnapped in May 2011 and held for months before their killing, with three videos released showing they were alive ? the last on 23 February 2012.
The failed operation caused a diplomatic row between Britain and Italy after the Italian president, Giorgio Napolitano, said it was "inexplicable" that Downing Street had not alerted Rome to the plan to rescue the men in advance. The foreign secretary, William Hague, insisted that that had been impossible.
British officials at the time blamed a splinter wing of the Boko Haram sect for the abductions, but a sect spokesman denied the group's involvement.
McManus was working for the construction company B Stabilini, which builds shopping centres and stadiums in Nigeria, when he was kidnapped on 12 May by gunmen who stormed his apartment in the city of Birnin Kebbi, about 110 miles from Sokoto. The gunmen stormed into the heavily guarded compound 500 metres from the construction site where the men were working and tied up the guards.
Lamolinara was also abducted. A German colleague managed to escape by scaling a wall, but a Nigerian engineer was shot and wounded. Another Italian, Eduardo Cavallieri, avoided capture and raised the alarm, the inquest was told.
The armed forces compensation scheme is based on a bureaucratic 15-level tariff system involving an exhaustive and macabre list of injuries.
Soldiers are entitled to ¡Ì570,000 for the most horrific injuries or combination of injuries, such as the loss of both legs and arms, which are classed as level 1 injuries. There is a sliding scale of progressively less severe injuries to level 15, for instance the loss of a toe.
It includes six levels of mental disorder, 13 categories of burns, and 93 types of fractures and dislocations. The Ministry of Defence claims the system is "modern, fair and simple".
All injuries above level 11 come with guaranteed payments for life in addition to an initial lump sum.
Details of the schemes run to 21 grisly pages. Here are examples of the kinds of injuries covered under the various levels:
Loss of both legs and both arms
Loss of sight in both eyes and loss of either both legs, or both arms
Total deafness and the loss of either both legs or both arms
Loss of both legs above the knee
Loss of both legs above or below the knee and one arm
Loss of both arms above or below the elbow and one leg
Loss of both legs at or above the knee
Loss of both arms at or above the elbow
Loss of one leg above the knee
Loss of one arm above the elbow
Loss of both legs below the knee
Loss of both arms below the elbow
Loss of one leg at or below the knee
Loss of one arm at or below the elbow
Loss of one arm below the elbow
Loss of one leg below the knee
Permanent and inoperable cataracts in both eyes
Complex injury covering all or most of the hand
Partial loss of two or more fingers
Loss of two or more front teeth
Fracture to three or more ribs
The National Rifle Association has broken its silence four days after the deadliest mass shooting in recent US history to call for ¡°additional regulations¡± on bump-fire stocks, which the Las Vegas shooter used to turn his semi-automatic rifles into rapid-fire weapons.
But alongside the rare concession, the NRA also suggested it was time for further relaxation of laws permitting Americans to carry concealed firearms.
¡°The NRA believes that devices designed to allow semi-automatic rifles to function like fully-automatic rifles should be subject to additional regulations,¡± Wayne LaPierre and Chris Cox, the group¡¯s two leading figures, said in a joint statement.
The NRA pair blamed the Obama administration for approving the devices for sale ¡°on at least two occasions¡±, and called on the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives ¡°to immediately review whether these devices comply with federal law¡±.
The NRA¡¯s suggestion comes after Republican lawmakers indicated they might support a ban on the devices. Firearms enthusiasts called bump-fire stocks a novelty device that made guns hard to fire accurately, and said they had no real self-defense value.
But in the same statement, the NRA claimed gun control laws would not stop further attacks, and called on Congress to pass a law that would make it easier for owners to carry weapons across state lines ? a measure that would gut local restrictions on gun carrying and might make it legal for tourists to carry their firearms on the New York City subway.
Passing this ¡°right-to-carry reciprocity¡± law, the NRA argued, ¡°will allow law-abiding Americans to defend themselves and their families from acts of violence¡±. The NRA said banning guns ¡°will do nothing to prevent future attacks ? a fact that has been proven time and again in countries across the world¡±.
Researchers who study the effects of major gun restrictions ? including in Australia, which saw a decline in murders and no further large-casualty mass shootings after buying back hundreds of thousands of guns in the wake of the Port Arthur massacre in 1996 ? would probably disagree.
In Washington, Republican leaders said they would consider restrictions on bump stocks, raising the prospect of the first US gun control legislation for years.
¡°Fully automatic weapons have been banned for a long time,¡± the House speaker, Paul Ryan, told MSNBC on Thursday. ¡°Apparently, this [the bump stock] allows you to take a semi-automatic and turn it into a fully automatic. So clearly that¡¯s something we need to look into.¡±
The mass shooting on Sunday night in Las Vegas that left 58 victims plus the gunman dead and wounded nearly 500 has reopened debate around the need for tougher gun laws.
Officials said 12 of the rifles authorities recovered from the hotel suite used by gunman Stephen Paddock were fitted with bump stocks. ¡°I didn¡¯t even know what they were until this week,¡± said Ryan, a frequent hunter. ¡°I think we¡¯re quickly coming up to speed with what this is.¡±
He offered no other details about what action the Republican-controlled House might take or what the timeline would be. But the remarks signalled a shift for a party that has thwarted legislative reform even as the horrors of Virginia Tech, Sandy Hook and Orlando have piled up.
Nevertheless, for many anti-gun activists, curtailing these devices would be the minimum Congress could do.
Shannon Watts, founder of Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, said: ¡°Of course bump stocks should be prohibited, but if that¡¯s the only action we take after 58 Americans are shot and killed and hundreds more injured, we should be ashamed of ourselves.
¡°We¡¯ll work with legislators interested in prohibiting bump stocks, but we¡¯ll also demand other laws to help save American lives. Now is the time to demand that lawmakers prioritise people over gun manufacturers¡¯ profits.¡±
Ryan¡¯s comments followed a call on Wednesday by the Senate¡¯s No 2 Republican, John Cornyn, for an examination of bump stocks. ¡°I own a lot of guns and as a hunter and sportsman I think that¡¯s our right as Americans, but I don¡¯t understand the use of this bump stock, and that¡¯s another reason to have a hearing,¡± he said.
Another Republican senator, Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, said: ¡°I have no problem in banning those.¡±
The White House welcomed the NRA¡¯s statement, but earlier the press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, said: ¡°The president¡¯s a strong supporter of the second amendment. That hasn¡¯t changed. At this point in the process, I think we all need to take a step back. We¡¯ve had one of the most horrific tragedies ever on US soil. I don¡¯t think we¡¯d want to go out and make rash decisions while we¡¯re still having an investigation.¡±
Democrats are pushing for a ban on the devices, which are selling out as gun enthusiasts react to reports they may be outlawed.
Senator Chris Murphy has outlined ¡°a menu¡± of gun control measures he plans to introduce, including to expand background checks and to restrict people convicted of domestic violence from obtaining a gun.
On Thursday, the minority leader, Chuck Schumer, said on the Senate floor: ¡°I say to President Trump: come out and say that you support and would sign a law to ban bump stocks, the modification used by the Las Vegas gunman to make his weapons automatic. That¡¯s small, and it¡¯s the right thing to do. Don¡¯t wait for the NRA to make up their mind. Do it.¡±
Senator Dianne Feinstein has also called for bump stocks to be banned. Congressman David Cicilline has also proposed a ban with a bill in the House that he said has 148 co-sponsors.
Bump stocks were originally intended to help people with limited hand mobility fire a semi-automatic without the individual trigger pulls required. They harness the recoil of the gun to allow the user to fire much faster than if they repeatedly pulled the trigger ? as the rifle recoils, the trigger bumps forward into the shooter¡¯s finger to speed up the rate of fire.
Meanwhile, Democratic congressman Adam Schiff and senator Richard Blumenthal have reintroduced legislation to hold gun manufacturers, sellers and interest groups accountable when they are deemed to have acted with negligence.
Schiff said: ¡°This bill would pierce the gun industry¡¯s liability shield by putting an end to the special protections the gun industry receives when they shirk their fundamental responsibility to act with reasonable care for the public safety.¡±
Donald Trump visited Las Vegas on Wednesday but when asked about gun control measures, said: ¡°We¡¯re not going to talk about that today.¡±
Las Vegas plans to open a memorial ¡°healing garden¡± on Friday with 58 trees to honour each of those killed in the massacre. It will also have a wall of remembrance, flowers, walkways and benches, ¡°all to create something beautiful out of something horrific¡±, a city news release said.
Workers on Thursday were preparing soil at a roughly half-acre plot of vacant city-owned land at Charleston and Casino Center boulevards.
Authorities embraced the idea after a local landscaping company, Stonerose Landscapes, proposed and designed the garden as a space for mourning, prayer and reflection. The magicians Siegfried and Roy are among those who have donated a tree.
The garden is due to be open amid First Friday events, a monthly arts festival which is going ahead as planned, a sign that the city is slowly returning to its routine.
A city council meeting on Wednesday had a moment¡¯s silence for the victims before becoming a platform for competing views on gun control. ¡°How stupid do we have to be to allow this to continue to happen?¡± said Bob Coffin, a Democrat, the LasVegas Review-Journal reported. He urged swift action to curb guns. ¡°Hell, that¡¯s not political, that¡¯s survival.¡±
A total of 160 firefighters from multiple fire departments across the city responded to the shooting, the Clark County fire chief, Greg Cassell, told reporters. ¡°Our response time to that incident, I can honestly say, for our first arrive unit, was less than five seconds.¡±
Cassell described a chaotic scene as people jumped over fences, ran into taxi lanes and crowded into nearby hotels. The fire department received more than 32 reports of gunshot victims. A standby crew of 16 paramedics at the concert cared for victims as they were ¡°literally under fire¡±, he added.
A retired Chilean general has died in an apparent suicide days after a court sentenced him to 20 years in prison for planning the murder of a chemist who worked for former dictator Augusto Pinochet.
Hernan Ramirez Rurange, 76, was sentenced along with 13 other ex-army officers on Tuesday for planning the murder of Eugenio Berrios, whose body was found on a Uruguayan beach in 1995.
Berrios¡¯ death was part of a scheme by Pinochet operatives to obstruct human rights investigations into the dictator¡¯s 1973-1990 regime, according to the court.
The Chilean government said on Thursday that Ramirez Rurange died of a gunshot wound to the head at his home in an upscale Santiago neighborhood, but did not provide further details.
Local media reported that the former general killed himself. He was set to begin his sentence within days.
Berrios oversaw the production of sarin gas and other chemicals for Pinochet¡¯s government, and long faced allegations that he helped poison a popular Chilean politician in 1982.
Some 25 years since Pinochet left power, human rights abuse cases dating from the dictatorship era are still moving through the Chilean courts or coming to light for the first time.
Ramirez Rurange¡¯s death comes just days after Manuel Contreras, the head of Pinochet¡¯s feared secret police, died of natural causes on 7 August, prompting celebrations in the capital.
Authorities on Saturday were linking a ¡°rambling¡± note expressing hatred toward the police to a suspect who went on a shooting rampage through the streets of Philadelphia on Friday night.
Two police officers and three other people suffered gunshot wounds before police killed the suspect, an unidentified man, in an alleyway. A woman died in the shooting, police said on Saturday.
Describing the spree as ¡°completely bizarre¡±, Richard Ross, the Philadelphia police commissioner, said police recovered a ¡°rambling¡± note at the scene which expressed vitriol for law enforcement and named an individual probation officer. Police believe the gunman wrote the note and acted alone.
¡°Obviously, he was hell-bent on hurting a lot of people,¡± Ross said. ¡°This rambling suggests that he clearly was trying to target a police officer, as he did.¡±
Ross said that police believe the gunman acted alone.
The chase and shootout began about 11.20pm on Friday when the suspect shot a police officer, Sergeant Sylvia Young, who was sitting in her patrol car, Ross said. Young was shot up to eight times in her left arm and protective vest.
¡°She didn¡¯t hear him say a word, just walked up on her and started firing,¡± Ross said. ¡°She did hear about 15 shots or so, and that¡¯s consistent with the scene, where we believe she was struck at least eight times.¡±
While fleeing the scene, the shooter fired into a bar and struck a security guard in the leg. The suspect grabbed a woman and used her as a shield from pursuing police before shooting her in the leg, too.
Moments before police officers confronted the suspect in an alley, the shooter fired into a car, critically injuring a man and killing a 25-year-old woman. The woman died of her injuries just before 2am. Police said the gunman shot her seven times.
Ross said two city police officers and University of Pennsylvania police officer Ed Miller chased the man into an alley, where they shot and killed him. Miller was wounded. On Saturday morning, both Miller and Young were in stable condition at Penn Presbyterian Hospital.
Police did not release the names of the suspect and the others injured during the chase.
Philadelphia mayor Jim Kenney praised the officers and pleaded with them to follow Young¡¯s example and wear their protective vests.
¡°Thank you for what you do for us every day and please, please, please, every shift, please wear your vest,¡± he said. ¡°They will save your life, as we saw tonight.¡±
Four thousand fans passed through the Fellowship Chapel on West Outer Drive, Detroit, Michigan, to pay their last respects to Proof on 18 April. Queuing by 8.30am, they were sent home over 12 hours later; throughout the day, the stream of human traffic never stopped. The rapper was laid out in a 24-carat gold-plated casket and had been dressed in a beige suit, his trademark Kangol cap and a pair of brown Seamless Edition Air Force 1 trainers; a Detroit Pistons jersey signed by his fans and friends on the basketball team was also draped over his dead body. Floral tributes were gathered around: one arrangement spelled out the word 'Daddy' while another was fashioned into an orange P; another read '8 Mile' in red roses, and another was in the shape of a white heart with a gold ribbon that read 'Spice of Life'.
The next day, the 2,000-capacity chapel was packed, with its car park holding the overflow, the crowd listening to the four-hour service via loudspeaker. Proof's family - blood and musical - filled the front rows of the chapel. Dr. Dre, Xzibit, Lloyd Banks and Young Buck of G-Unit, and Treach and Vinnie of Naughty by Nature were there, as well as the remaining members of Proof's group D12 and a host of other local luminaries: members of Slum Village, of 5 Ela, Goon Sqwad, Promatic and more.
Eminem sat between his manager, Paul Rosenberg, and 50 Cent in the second row, just behind Proof's mother, wife, aunts, children and cousins. The loss visibly weighed on the hip-hop superstar. Wearing a black suit and a black T-shirt emblazoned with Proof's likeness, he moved slowly, hunched over, a shadow of his usual self. He repeatedly embraced members of Proof's family - his wife Sharonda, mother Sherallene and grandmother Myra - crying with them, hugging them, and rocking back and forth. Eminem had lost the best friend he had ever known, the only person who had stood by him since his teens, his right-hand man both on and off-stage.
DeShaun Dupree Holton, aka P, Big Proof, Proof or Derty Harry [sic], died at 4.30am on 11 April at the age of 32. That night, he had been at the CCC club, an after-hours establishment on a sketchy stretch of East 8 Mile road in Detroit, where he and a few friends were playing pool after a night of party-hopping. He found himself in an argument with Keith Bender Jr, a 35-year-old Desert Storm veteran, allegedly during a game of pool. An altercation ensued, attracting the attention of the club's bouncer, Mario Etheridge, who is Bender's cousin. Within a few minutes, both Bender and Proof were fatally shot: a bullet to Bender's face took his life eight days later (the same morning that Proof was buried), while Proof was killed instantly by two shots to his back and one to the back of his head.
These are the facts, but the events that led to the twin shootings are not nearly as clear-cut as the Detroit police and press have suggested. From the start, the Detroit Free Press and other local news agencies took initial witness accounts at face value, and portrayed the incident as a thug rapper slaying a war veteran in cold blood. According to their accounts, Proof pistol-whipped Bender, then shot him in the face, at which point, while Proof stood over Bender threatening to shoot him again, Etheridge shot Proof three times.
Etheridge drove Bender to the hospital that night and without revealing his identity, phoned the police en route to report a shooting at the club, but he avoided detectives for several days thereafter. As their investigation slowly drew closer to him, Etheridge opted to turn himself in with his lawyer present, and gave testimony identical to the version of events that had been reported in the local papers. By the time he did, well before any substantive ballistics tests were concluded (as we go to press, they are still being processed), the media, had tried and convicted DeShaun Holton as the man who shot first and received his just deserts.
Nowhere was it reported that, as some witnesses claim, the fight that ensued in the club that night involved more men than Keith Bender and Proof, nor was it reported that others at the scene claim to have seen guns fired by several people. The police initially reported that Proof brandished a gun that was licensed to him - and the media ran with this story. Etheridge has not been charged with murder by the authorities but instead faces two counts of possessing and discharging a weapon without a license. In a preliminary hearing, he pleaded not guilty to these charges. In Michigan if an individual fatally shoots someone while coming to the defence of another, it is not considered murder or manslaughter.
On 27 April, 16 days after the incident, the Detroit police announced that Proof did not enter the CCC club with a firearm. They also stated that Etheridge did not arrive with a pistol either, but rather grabbed a gun during the ensuing ruckus.
That may well be true, but according to H. Mack - a very close childhood friend of Proof's who was near enough to the action that night to have been shot in the hand by a stray bullet and treated at the same hospital where Proof was pronounced dead - even the revamped police version of events isn't quite right. 'It was fucked up,' he says. 'The fight wasn't just the two of them, everyone in the club was involved. Guns started goin' off. P hit the guy, and then his cousin Etheridge fired shots into the ceiling. . I do not believe P shot the man - he'd never shoot nobody unless they fired first. That's who he was. Yeah, they were fighting over some bullshit but he would never, ever shoot someone over some bullshit. It was all just fucked up. 'The CCC club is a stout red building with a grey roof, a thick grey steel door and no windows. It is on a barren corner of 8 Mile across from a giant yellow Mega Pawn store. 8 Mile marks the border between the city and its suburbs, between the haves and have-nots, between black and white. The CCC is on the black city side, and has been a hotbed of illegality and violence since 1996. 'Since that year, there have been 18 incidents at the club that have resulted in police reports,' says deputy chief James Tate, spokesman for the Detroit Police Department. 'These incidents range from a fight to a stolen vehicle, and one raid.' In 2005 alone, a total of 337 violations were issued at the club, resulting in 12 felony arrests, 68 towed vehicles and 24 confiscated firearms. In February of this year, a bouncer at the club was shot twice in the torso. 'We've been trying to get the place shut down as of late,' Tate says. 'All we can do is issue tickets. The courts decide the rest. When you have a location that is a magnet for trouble, we do what we can to see the situation resolved. When you have owners operating illegally, they're setting the tone for whatever occurs from that point on.'
It might seem surprising that Proof, a founding member of the million-earning Shady family - the music collective that, second only to Motown, has put Detroit music on the map - was even in such a club. Buoyed by Eminem's success, he had enjoyed huge hits with the D12 albums Devil's Night and last year's D12 World, a number one in both Britain and America. But he wasn't at the CCC to bolster his street credibility - he was there because as countless friends testify, he was Detroit to the core.
Proof was a man who rarely slept: he was either at clubs, in the studio or napping between the two. Long after he didn't need to care for others, he did, helping, guiding and influencing everyone around him and apprenticing local rappers: Hand 2 Hand: Official Mixtape Instruction Manual, the first mixtape release on his Iron Fist label, stars MCs who would never have been heard outside of Detroit if it weren't for Proof. He also used his fame to work for local musicians' benefits, encouraging them to join the Musicians Union, which provides them with healthcare and pensions.
He did not brag about these efforts, nor boast of his guidance of Eminem and Obie Trice's careers. Proof was key in selecting the instrumental tracks that best suited their skills, and inspired Eminem at all times of day and night by text messaging him couplets and rhymed phrases. Proof was a nimble, witty freestyle MC, with a ferociously curious mind. He loved everything from Miles Davis to Jimi Hendrix. He was a gifted and giving anomaly, a rapper who cared for art over materialism, but did all he could to bring wealth to others.
The easiest way to understand Proof is to ask this simple question: what other rapper with the rhyme skills and smarts to pen chart hits, and on the heels of multi-platinum success and the worldwide attention brought through his association with Eminem, would choose to release as his debut solo album an introspective record inspired by the philosophy of the Grateful Dead's Jerry Garcia - last year's Searching for Jerry Garcia
Proof was represented in two ways in 8 Mile, the 2002 biopic based on Eminem's life. He played the MC that causes 'Rabbit' (Eminem) to choke in the first battle-rap scene of the film. But his true spirit inspired the dreadlocked character 'Future' (played by Mekhi Phifer), the MC who organized and refereed the rap battles. He encourages Rabbit to find his voice as a rapper, just as Proof did for Marshall Mathers. Swift of D12 said it best shortly after hearing that his friend had died, when gathered with Proof's closest friends - a hundred or so strong - at St. Andrew's Hall, the club where he had hosted so many rap battles. 'That nigga P,' Swift announced to everyone, 'he came out of hip hop's pussy.'
DeShaun Holton's father was once involved in the music industry and produced records by acts including Tower of Power. In an interview, however, Proof once referred to his father as a 'crackhead' and it has been alleged that his mother was also involved in drugs. He attended Gesu private school in his youth before enrolling at Osborn High on Detroit's east side. He formed his first rap group, the 5 Ela, with his friends Thyme and Mudd, then the influential Goon Sqwad, which featured Stylz, Trick Trick and DJ OC. He truly left his mark, however, at designer Maurice Malone's Hip Hop Shop, where he MC'd freestyle sessions on Saturday afternoons. Local and national talent, from the Notorious BIG to Redman and Method Man passed through the shop, eager to battle with Detroit's finest.
Proof was the consummate diplomat, charming everyone. He was also the only kid in the neighbourhood to see the potential in a smart-ass white boy named Marshall Mathers. Proof taught Mathers how to hone his wit, and sneaked him into the Osborn High cafeteria to battle rap at lunch hour.
As Mudd of 5 Ela recalled warmly, Proof was always a loyal friend. 'He was my big brother, he taught me how to rap, how to talk to the ladies, he taught me to kick game,' he said. 'This is who he was: when my first child was about to be born, I was telling him one day how worried I was about providing for my family. The very next day, without a word, he dropped off a huge bag full of all his family's old baby clothes.'
As Eminem declared at Proof's funeral, 'Without Proof, there would be a Marshall Mathers, but there would not be an Eminem, there would not be a D12 and there would not be a Slim Shady.' He made it clear that Proof looked out for Marshall when no one else did. 'This is the man I knew,' Eminem said. 'He came to me one day when I was living in my house on the east side and threw a pair of shoes at me and said, "Put 'em on." I said, "Why?" He said, "Put 'em on your feet." I said "Why?" 'Because I'm tired of you wearing those same dirty-ass shoes.'"
It is an understatement to say that Eminem was hit hard by the loss - it was the latest in a string of hardships that has befallen him. Following a six-week spell in rehab for addiction to the sleeping pill Ambien, in the first five months of 2006 he has re-married his ex-wife Kim and then divorced her for a second time after only 82 days together, while his mother's health has also drastically degenerated. Before Proof's killing, Eminem's friend Obie Trice also came close to death; on New Year's Eve, the Shady Records artist most-likely-to-break-out-big-this-year, was shot in the head, while driving himself and his girlfriend home from a party. Trice steered his car safely off the highway, let his girlfriend take the wheel and two days later was found doing push-ups in his hospital room.
At Proof's funeral, Trice echoed a theme that ran throughout the proceedings - that violence in Detroit, and every black community in America is needlessly ending lives. 'I want to talk to the black men in here,' he said, choking back tears. 'We been comin' up in this struggle and we killin' each other. Yeah, I know - you 'hood, you gangsta. We all from the 'hood. Detroit is the 'hood. We are killin' each other, dawg, and it's about nothin'. We are leaving our kids, our mamas, our grandmamas over nothin'.'
Proof's casket was led by a white horse-drawn carriage to Woodlawn Cemetery, a two-hour trip that tied up traffic across town. His final resting place is beautiful - more a park than a collection of gravestones, complete with lush, manicured foliage, a pond, ducks and geese. The coffin was opened for his nearest and dearest to see him once more. They kissed his cheek or forehead and said their last goodbyes, as a flock of white doves was released in his honour. Afterwards, they gathered at the Good Life Lounge, to do what more than a few felt would be his wish for them that day - to have a party. A huge D-town soul-food spread was laid out: barbeque, mashed potatoes, greens, mac and cheese, biscuits. Old school hip hop was in the house, everything from Eric B and Rakim to NWA boomed from the system. The occasion was grim, but Proof's legacy prevailed - he had brought everyone together once more, and the lust for living that informed his life was tangible. As the night wore on and the dance floor filled, songs like D12's 'Purple Pills' (later re-titled 'Purple Hills') and Proof's solo work inspired hoots, hollers, and the joyous spraying of beer.
'He gave me my name,' Obie Trice said of his friend and mentor. 'When I met him at the Hip Hop Shop, my name was Obie 1. Proof was about to introduce me and he looked at me for a while and said, "What's your name? Your real name, no gimmicks." He introduced me as Obie Trice. He gave me my name. He did all that shit, man. He was the pioneer of Detroit hip-hop music.'
Mike D, manager of St. Andrew's Hall, knew Proof for years and saw money and fame have little effect on him. He recalled the night not long ago when Proof drove up to the club in a new BMW 750 - a gift from Eminem. 'It was not the kind of car he'd roll in,' Mike says. 'I was like, "Nice car." He threw me the keys and said, "Take it for a ride. You know I don't care about material shit." He didn't - he'd drive anything.' Proof cared far more for people - by the end of an average night, going from place to place, he'd accumulate a posse of 20 or more, hosting a roving party rooted by his magnetic spirit. 'I've never met anyone like him,' Mike D says. 'He'd be at our club nearly every night that he went out. He didn't care what kind of band was on, he just wanted to see the music. He used to take my entire staff at St. Andrew's out to breakfast when he'd be there at closing time. I'm talking 30, 50 people - all of the employees, the DJs, everyone.'
Over the course of the night of the wake, within many circles of conversation, talk inevitably turned to the circumstances of Proof's death. Those who knew Proof were quick to point out how he rolled: he liked to drink and when necessary, had no problem throwing a punch. But he was no gun-toting killer. Proof's police record best tells the tale: it reveals several tickets for public drunkenness and disorderly conduct, including an incident in which he swung at a police officer. None of his run-ins with the law involved weapons. Proof was a man with many sides - warm and charming, mischievous and sly, sometimes a brawler, but never a gang-banging braggart.
A close friend who was at the CCC but asked to remain anonymous has his own version of what went down that night. 'Once Etheridge started shooting in the air, we all got down on the floor behind the pool table,' he alleges. 'We were just trying to get out of there, but Proof and Bender started fighting again.' According to this witness, the club was cleared while Proof's lifeless body lay on the floor. A few minutes later, he was deposited outside the club's back door, his jewellery and money gone.
There is much left unanswered about the circumstances surrounding Proof's death. This incident is a senseless tragedy that should inspire change, not blame. In the end, ballistic science will reveal whether the bullet that killed Keith Bender was shot from the same gun that killed DeShaun Holton. If that is the case, perhaps the city of Detroit and the rest of America will search beyond the knee-jerk headlines that portrayed Proof as the gun-slinging thug who killed the war hero. If the initial reports are true, perhaps, in time, how he died will not obscure how he lived. When the dust settles, Proof should be seen truthfully, as the authentic voice of Detroit that he was: complex, angry, sarcastic, earnest, loyal, and proud of his roots. He should be remembered as the artist that he was - a man consumed with supporting the place that weaned him; a man, who was, ultimately, consumed by the very same.
When KRS-One penned 'Stop The Violence' in response to the 1987 shooting of his partner Scott La Rock he ushered in what, in retrospect, looks like hip hop's age of chivalry, with gunplay largely confined to the records rappers made. A decade later Black Star re-worked the song as 'Definition', with the chorus 'one, two, three, it's kinda dangerous to be an MC', in response to the murders of Biggie Smalls and Tupac Shakur. What should have been an epitaph for an era now looks like prophecy, with names like Big L, Soulja Slim and Run DMC's producer Jam Master Jay among the fallen.
Some label owners (Death Row's Suge Knight the most notorious) have been forced to deny murdering their own artists, while some stars are becoming victims of their own entourage: Lil' Kim was jailed for perjury last year after claiming her 'magic sunglasses' prevented her seeing her friends exchange shots with a rival rap crew outside New York radio station Hot 97. The days when KRS could claim 'real bad boys move in silence' seem like a quaint relic of a bygone time.
The 16-year-old was abducted and suffered a series of assaults before being stabbed to death in a secluded park in Reading on May 7, Reading crown court heard.
Her 18-year-old friend, who cannot be named for legal reasons, was also repeatedly raped and assaulted and was shot in the centre of her forehead but "miraculously" survived, the court heard.
Opening the prosecution's case, Richard Latham QC, said that next week the 18-year-old, who was forced to watch her friend being fatally stabbed, would give evidence and describe the "simply horrific" attacks.
Mr Latham said that the 18-year-old was told her own last memory would be watching Mary-Ann being butchered in the park. The psychological torture was meant to last until the time of death, Mr Latham said.
When Mary-Ann was lying on the ground in the park one of the men started stabbing her "everywhere" on her body; she pleaded to be stabbed in the neck, but "they said they wanted her to die slowly", Mr Latham said.
Both the victims were forced to smoke heroin and crack cocaine by their attackers while they were raped and attacked with knives for several hours in a cramped guesthouse room, the jury heard. Towels were put down on the floor, Mr Latham said to stop blood being found later for evidence.
The barrister said that the gang had targeted the girls "for revenge" after one of the defendants, who knew them, became convinced they had set him up for a robbery.
The court heard that Adrian Thomas, 20, a painter who had started renting a flat in Reading, had been assaulted and burgled on April 18 or 19, a couple of months prior to the attacks on the girls.
Mr Latham said Mr Thomas believed the girls had left the door to the flat open deliberately and a quantity of drugs was allegedly stolen by other individuals, "bad company", who the girls knew previously.
Mr Latham said that a couple of weeks after the robbery Mr Thomas had gathered a gang together in south London to "sort the girls out". The court heard they had a "gameplan" and set off with various weapons.
The defendants are Mr Thomas, of Battersea, south London; Llewellyn Adams, 24, of Balham, south London; Indrit Krasniqi, 18, of Chiswick, west London; Michael Johnson, 19, of Southfields, south-west London and brothers Jamaile and Joshua Morally, 23 and 22, of Balham, south London.
They all deny a total of nine counts each, which include one charge of murder, one charge of attempted murder, two counts of kidnap, three counts of rape and two of causing grievous bodily harm with intent. Jamaile Morally also denies a further charge of raping Mary-Ann.
Mr Latham said the teenagers' ordeal on May 6 last year started when Mary-Ann and her friend were sitting in a car in the car park of the Wallingford Arms pub in Reading.
The barrister told the court that the two girls were bundled into the boot of a red Nissan Almera by the gang and driven to the Abbey guesthouse in Reading, where the men booked into room 19.
The girls were force to strip naked, raped vaginally and orally, cut with knives, hit with a metal pole and told repeatedly that they would be murdered, the QC said. At one point a gun was put into the 18-year-old girl's mouth while the men laughed, the jury was told.
Mr Latham said that, despite her ordeal, the 18-year-old girl was able to recall specific roles played by the individuals in the torture, with Mr Thomas, the Morally brothers and Mr Johnson apparently taking the leading roles.
The QC said: "At times, some of the men would ask Thomas for permission to do things, asking if they could burn or stab the girls. He gave that permission, saying 'Yes, go on, I don't care. It's too late now. Nobody is going to help them now.'"
After hours of abuse, the girls were then taken to Prospect Park with pillows over their heads, the jury heard.
At the park, Mr Latham said: "It was Johnson who then stabbed Mary-Ann in the abdomen with a large brown kitchen knife. He had her by the neck and hair; she was begging him to stab her in the neck.
"Mary-Ann then fell on her side and Johnson was stabbing her everywhere. She fell over in a ball trying to protect herself but he rolled her over trying to find a new place on her body to stab her. They said they wanted her to die slowly. She became unable to move and just lay there crying, when she cried or made any sound she was stabbed again."
The friend heard the men discussing whether to shoot Mary-Ann but learnt then that the bullet was intended for her, the court heard. Mr Latham said the men asked Mary-Ann's friend: "Are you ready to die?"
"A loaded gun was placed against her forehead and it was discharged. She was instantly unconscious and she was left for dead," Mr Latham said. "Miraculously the bullet did not kill her; it was she who raised the alarm asking for the assistance of a passerby."
The court heard how the 18-year-old awoke, found Mary-Ann lying next to her, still breathing, and walked in a daze to a road, where she was nearly hit by cars. She raised the alarm with a man passing by. When police arrived at the park, Mary-Ann had died.
Mr Latham told the jury of eight women and four men that the men in the dock today had been jointly charged and shared joint responsibility for what happened to Mary-Ann and her friend.
The QC said a police search of the park revealed a Mickey Mouse sock lying close to Mary-Ann's body. Mr Latham said DNA evidence of Mary-Ann's blood and evidence pointing to Mr Thomas as well as gunshot particles were found on the sock.
The QC said the men had "joint responsibility" for the alleged attacks.
However, the court was told that Mr Adams, the driver of the car, sat through most of what was taking place without actively participating, although he laughed along with the other men.
Mr Krasniqi, the court was told, also played a smaller part, although a witness recalled seeing him standing over the girls with a knife at one point, laughing and pointing at Mary-Ann saying: "Cut her fat off."
May 13 US soldier killed when convoy ambushed near Diwaniya
May 26 US vehicle hits landmine in Baghdad killing one soldier and injuring three
May 26 US soldier killed and another wounded as convoy comes under enemy fire near Haditha
May 27 Two US soldiers killed and nine wounded in attack on army unit in Falluja. Two attackers killed, six captured
May 29 US soldier killed travelling on supply route
June 3 US soldier killed at checkpoint south of Balad
June 5 US soldier killed and five injured in rocket-propelled grenade attack in Falluja
June 7 US soldier killed and four injured in attack near Tikrit involving rocket-propelled grenade and small arms fire
June 8 US soldier shot dead at checkpoint in al-Qaim, near Syrian border, by men who had approached vehicle asking for medical help. One assailant killed and one captured, but others escape
June 10 US paratrooper killed and another injured in rocket-propelled grenade attack in south-west Baghdad. They were manning trash collection point when assailants got out of a van and opened fire. One attacker killed
June 17 US soldier on patrol in Baghdad killed by sniper
June 18 One US soldier dies and one wounded in drive-by shooting at petrol station in Baghdad
June 19 US soldier killed and two injured in grenade attack on military ambulance in Al Iskandariya
June 22 One US marine killed and eight other US service members injured in explosion that may have been caused by bomb dropped from B-52 Stratofortress that landed near forces at Godoria Range, along northern coast of Djibouti
June 22 US soldier killed and another injured in grenade attack on military convoy south of Baghdad in Khan Azad
June 24 Six British military personnel killed and eight wounded in two incidents in southern Iraq, both near town of Amara, 125 miles north-west of Basra
June 26 US soldier attached to 1st Marine Expeditionary Force killed in ambush near Najaf while investigating car theft
June 26 One special operations force service member killed and eight injured in hostile fire incident in south-west Baghdad
June 28 Two soldiers assigned to 3rd Battalion, 18th Field Artillery Regiment, deployed from Fort Sill, Oklahoma, reported missing three days earlier, found dead west of Al Taji
June 30 Nine Iraqis, including imam, killed after explosion beside mosque in Falluja. US later claim it was caused by a bomb-making class inside mosque
July 2 US Army 352nd Civil Affairs Command soldier dies of wounds received on previous day, after Baghdad convoy hit by explosive device
July 3 Sniper kills US soldier in Baghdad, while mortar attack on American military base to north-west injures at least 10
July 3 US marine killed and three others injured during mine-clearing operations in Kerbala, south of Baghdad
July 5 Blast kills seven Iraqi police recruits at graduation ceremony in Ramadi, 60 miles west of Baghdad
July 6 US soldier from 1st Armored Division dies of gunshot wound, while guarding Baghdad University
July 6 Soldier of 1st Armored Division dies after platoon patrolling Baghdad's Ad Hamiya neighbourhood ambushed by two Iraqi gunmen
July 7 US soldier killed when explosive device blasts vehicle during routine patrol in Kadhimya neighbourhood of Baghdad
July 13 One person killed and another injured after bomb explodes near police station in Baghdad suburb
July 14 US military convoy attacked by rocket-propelled grenades and machine guns in Baghdad. One soldier killed and 10 others injured
July 16 Bomb explodes near highway west of Baghdad killing US soldier and injuring two others
July 18 Bomb attack on US convoy in Falluja kills soldier
June 19 1st Armored Division soldier dies after small arms and rocket-propelled grenade attack in Abu Ghureib neighbourhood of Baghdad
July 20 Two US soldiers killed during ambush by guerrillas firing guns and rocket-propelled grenades near northern city of Mosul
July 21 Soldier of 1st Armored Division killed and three wounded after vehicle hits explosive device in As Sulaykh district of Baghdad
July 22 US soldier killed and another wounded when convoy hit by rocket-propelled grenade and small arms fire north-west of Baghdad
July 23 Soldier of 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault) killed and seven soldiers wounded when explosive device strikes two military vehicles outside Mosul
July 23 Soldier of 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment killed and another soldier and contractor wounded when convoy attacked by explosive device on Highway 1 in Ar Ramadi
July 24 Three US soldiers from 101st Airborne Division killed in rifle and grenade attack while travelling to Qayarra West outside Mosul
July 26 Three US soldiers guarding Ba'qubah children's hospital killed and four others wounded in grenade attack
July 26 One US soldier killed and two wounded when convoy attacked with small arms, rocket-propelled grenades and possibly an explosive device on Highway 10 near Abu Ghureib. Three Iraqis wounded
July 27 US soldier killed and another wounded when rocket-propelled grenade hits patrol in northern Babil province near village of Al Haswa
July 28 Explosive device dropped from overpass on to US convoy travelling through Al Rashid district of Baghdad, killing soldier of 1st Armored Division and injuring three others
July 30 Soldier of 4th Infantry Division killed and two wounded in small arms attack at tactical operation centre 26 miles east of Ba'qubah
July 31 US soldier killed and two wounded after vehicle hits landmine on road to Baghdad airport
August 1 Soldier of 4th Infantry Division killed and three injured after rocket-propelled grenade attack on convoy south of Shumayt. In separate incident, soldier of 1st Armored Division dies of gunshot wound received previous day in Baghdad
August 6 Two 1st Armored Division soldiers killed and one wounded in firefight in Al Rashid district of Baghdad
August 7 At least 17 people killed and 60 wounded when truck bomb explodes outside Jordanian embassy compound in Baghdad. In separate incident, 82nd Airborne Division soldier shot dead on guard duty in Al Mansor district of Baghdad
August 10 Soldier of 4th Infantry Division killed and two wounded in improvised explosive attack near police station in Tikrit
August 12 US soldier killed and two wounded in bomb attack in Sunni Muslim town of Ramadi, 60 miles west of Baghdad
August 13 Bomb attack on four-vehicle convoy south-east of Tikrit kills US soldier and wounds another. A further US soldier killed when M-113 armored personnel carrier strikes explosive device near town of Ad Dwar
August 14 Bomb blast hits military ambulance in Basra killing one British soldier and wounding two others
August 16 Mortar attack on Abu Ghraib prison on outskirts of Baghdad kills six Iraqis and injures 59
August 17 Danish soldier killed in gun battle between troops and group of looters in southern Iraq. Two Iraqis also die. Dane is first non-US or British soldier to die in conflict
August 18 Soldier of 1st US Armored Division killed by explosive device in central Baghdad
August 19 Twenty-two people killed, including Sergio Vieira de Mello, top UN envoy to Iraq, after truck bomb devastates UN headquarters in Baghdad in worst attack on UN civilian complex ever
August 20 US citizen working as interpreter killed and two US soldiers wounded in small arms fire and rocket-propelled grenade attack in Tikrit. Soldier of 1st Armored Division killed and two wounded by improvised explosive device in Karkah district of Baghdad
August 21 US marine shot dead in Al Hilla by unidentified gunman
August 23 Three British servicemen killed and another wounded in Basra
August 26 Soldier of 3rd Corps Support Command killed and two wounded after convoy blasted by explosive device near town of Hamariya
August 27 Soldier of 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment soldier killed and three wounded by explosive device in Falluja. 205th Military Intelligence Brigade soldier killed in attack on military convoy in Baghdad
August 28 British soldier killed and another wounded during attack by a crowd of Iraqis armed with rocket-propelled grenades and small arms in Ali al-Sharqi, 120 miles north-west of Basra
August 29 Car bomb at Imam Ali mosque in Najaf kills at least 83 people, including top Shi'ite Muslim leader, Ayatollah Mohammed Baqer al-Hakim, and wounds around 175. In separate rocket-propelled grenade and small arms fire attack just north of As Suaydat soldier of 4th Infantry Division killed and three wounded
August 31 Two US soldiers killed and one wounded in firefight five miles north-east of Shkin in Paktika province
September 1 Two 220th Military Police Brigade soldiers killed and one wounded when vehicle strikes explosive device along main supply route south of Baghdad
September 2 Car bomb blasts Rasafa police headquarters in east Baghdad, killing one and wounding 15
September 3 Suicide bombing in town of Ramadi kills Iraqi civilian and injures two US soldiers
September 9 Car bomb kills one Iraqi and wounds 53, including six American military personnel, in Arbil, northern Iraq. In a separate incident US soldier killed and another wounded after vehicle hits improvised explosive device on supply route north-east of Baghdad
September 12 Two US soldiers killed and seven wounded during pre-dawn raid in Ramadi, 60 miles west of Baghdad
September 14 US soldier killed and three wounded as convoy runs over bomb planted on road in Falluja
September 15 US soldier on patrol in Baghdad killed in rocket-propelled grenade attack
September 18 Iraqi guerrillas kill three and wound two US soldiers inspecting suspected weapons site near Tikrit
September 20 Two US soldiers die and 13 are injured in mortar attack on US-run Abu Ghreib prison complex. Elsewhere, US soldier killed by roadside bomb near Ramadi
September 22 Suicide bomber at car park next to UN headquarters in Baghdad kills Iraqi security guard
September 24 Bomb apparently aimed at US troops tears through two buses in Baghdad, killing an Iraqi and wounding about 20. Elsewhere, several injured after bomb blast in cinema in Mosul
September 25 Bomb explodes at Baghdad's Aike hotel housing journalists from US television network NBC, killing a Somali guard. Separately, a rocket-propelled grenade attack kills US soldier and wounds two others in Kirkuk
September 29 US soldier killed in bomb and gunfire to attack in town of Habbaniya, about 42 miles from Baghdad
October 1 Bomb blast near US military base in Tikrit kills woman soldier and wounds three others. Elsewhere, US soldier killed in rocket-propelled grenade attack near town of Samarra, north of Baghdad
October 4 Rocket-propelled grenade and gun attack on American patrol in Baghdad kills one US soldier and wounds another
October 6 US soldier killed and another wounded by bomb attack west of Baghdad. Separately, two more US soldiers and Iraqi interpreter killed and two US soldiers wounded in bomb blast south of Baghdad
October 7 No casualties after blast hits compound of Iraqi Foreign Ministry in Baghdad
October 9 Two suicide bombers kill eight Iraqis at police station in Shi'ite Muslim district of Sadr City, north-east Baghdad. In same area two US soldiers killed and four wounded in ambush. Another US soldier killed in separate rocket-propelled grenade attack on military convoy north-east of Iraqi capital
October 12 At least six people killed in blast outside Baghdad Hotel in city centre
Thilan Samaraweera, perhaps the most in-form batsman in world cricket until he was shot in the leg when his Sri Lankan team was attacked in Pakistan, is aiming to return to action as soon as possible after being released from hospital.
Samaraweera, 32, this week left hospital just over a fortnight after the 3 March attack in Lahore killed six policemen and a driver and left the batsman's career in doubt.
"The first five days in the hospital were terrible. I could not move and I did not know what to think," he said. But Samaraweera considered himself lucky that the bullet passed through his hamstring and did not hit any bones or nerves.
Samaraweera was among seven Sri Lanka players and a British assistant coach injured when more than a dozen gunmen used rifles, grenades and rocket launchers to attack a team convoy on its way to Gaddafi Stadium for a Test against Pakistan.
"The last 10 months I was doing very well and then this happened," said Samaraweera, who had the bullet removed from his left thigh after being flown back to Sri Lanka on an emergency flight. The day before the attack, Samaraweera had notched his second successive Test double century, scoring 214. In the first Test in Karachi, he had made 231.
That made Samaraweera just the seventh batsman after Walter Hammond, Don Bradman, Vinod Kambli, team-mate Kumar Sangakkara, Ricky Ponting and Graeme Smith to score successive Test double centuries. "I hope I can do that again," Samaweera said.
If he recovers in time, his next chance could come against Pakistan, who arrive in July for three Tests. New Zealand then visit Sri Lanka in late August.
Samaraweera's immediate aim is to undergo rehabilitation for about a month and then start cycling and gym work. He hopes to start light batting in early May. Samaraweera said he would even consider playing again in Pakistan if the security situation improved, but that it was too early to talk about that.
A Pakistani umpire who was shot during the attack is still in a Lahore hospital recovering from his wounds.
A portrait of an angry doctor seeking revenge on the medical professionals he believed turned their backs on him emerged on Saturday, as a New York hospital began to recover from a shooting that left one doctor dead, another critically injured and four staff members and a patient wounded.
Dr Henry Bello aired his complaints against his former workplace in an email purportedly sent to the New York Daily News about two hours before he returned to Bronx Lebanon hospital on Friday and pulled an AM-15 assault rifle from under his white lab coat.
Bello, who killed himself, had warned former colleagues two years ago that he would return someday to kill them after he was forced to resign amid sexual harassment allegations.
¡°This hospital terminated my road to a licensure to practice medicine,¡± the email said. ¡°First, I was told it was because I always kept to myself. Then it was because of an altercation with a nurse.¡± He also blamed a doctor for blocking his chances at practicing medicine.
A law enforcement official said that when Bello arrived at the hospital he asked for a specific doctor whom he blamed for his having to resign. The physician wasn¡¯t there at the time. The official spoke on condition of anonymity.
It was not clear if Bello knew Dr Tracy Sin-Yee Tam, 32, who was killed in the shooting and was, like him, a family medicine doctor. Hospital officials said on Saturday Tam normally worked in one of the hospital¡¯s satellite clinics and was covering a shift in the main hospital as a favor to someone else.
The victims largely suffered gunshot wounds to the head, chest and abdomen. Another physician remained in critical condition. One of the injured was a patient, two are medical students and the rest are doctors. All but one was in stable condition on Saturday.
Hospital vice-president Errol C Schneer said his staff responded heroically.
¡°Many of our staff risked their own lives to save patients,¡± Schneer told reporters at the hospital where the 16th and 17th floors remained closed and staffers were still recovering from the shooting that sent people diving for cover and huddling in patients¡¯ rooms while the gunman was on the loose.
Adding to the chaos, authorities said, was a fire alarm that went off when Bello attempted to set himself ablaze, the flames being extinguished by sprinklers shortly before he shot himself.
Detectives searched the Bronx home where Bello was most recently living and found the box for the gun. Investigators were checking serial numbers and trying to determine where it was purchased.
Bello¡¯s former co-workers described a man who was aggressive, loud and threatening.
¡°All the time he was a problem,¡± said Dr David Lazala, who trained Bello. When Bello was forced out in 2015, he sent Lazala an email blaming him for the dismissal.
Dr Maureen Kwankam told the Daily News that ¡°he promised to come back and kill us then¡±.
According to New York state education department records, Bello graduated from Ross University and had a permit to practice as an international medical graduate that was issued on 1 July 2014 and expired last year on the same day.
Bello also worked as a pharmacy technician at Metropolitan hospital in Manhattan because he was having a hard time getting licensed as a physician, but quit the job in 2012 and filed for unemployment, according to the lawyer who represented him on appeal in 2014. He lost his case. One former colleague at Metropolitan said he would frequently argue with nurses and bristled at being told what to do, but his attorney in the unemployment action said that was not the man he knew.
¡°I¡¯m absolutely shocked,¡± attorney David Wim said. ¡°He was such a nice gentleman. He was very humble, very polite, very respectful.¡±
Wim said he even jokingly suggested to his assistant that she date the doctor, who was unmarried.
In 2004, the doctor pleaded guilty to unlawful imprisonment, a misdemeanor, after a 23-year-old woman told police Bello grabbed her. He was arrested again in 2009 on a charge of unlawful surveillance, after two women reported he was trying to look up their skirts with a mirror. That case was eventually sealed.
Schneer told the New York Times the hospital did not know about Bello¡¯s criminal history when he was hired.
¡°At that time, and as a result of a human resources and security department background check, which includes fingerprinting, there was no record of any conviction for sexual abuse,¡± he said.On a suburban estate in Milton Keynes two teenage boys were shot in the head at close range as they chatted in an alleyway. One died instantly. The second was slumped over the bloodstained body of his friend ? but he was still breathing, despite the two bullets lodged in his head.
He died 14 hours later under police guard in an intensive care unit.
Gabriel Farah, the brother of one of the victims, said it was nothing short of an execution. "Whoever did this was aiming to kill these boys," he said, struggling to understand why his younger brother's life was ended by such a callous assassination.
The killings, on Thursday night last week, shocked not only local people but also seasoned detectives, raising fears that the kind of teenage violence associated with inner-city areas of London, Manchester and Birmingham is migrating to smaller towns.
Until the killings the residents of the Fishermead estate had suffered their share of crime and antisocial behaviour. This development was built 40 years ago in a grid of leafy squares, boulevards and avenues, as an answer to high-rise blight. It is a little rough around the edges now.
Some homeowners, worn down by repeated vandalism, have installed CCTV cameras. Rubbish is piled outside boarded-up properties and people talk despairingly of groups of teenagers dealing in cannabis a few metres from their front doors.
But there had been nothing like the murders of 19-year-old Mohamed Farah and Amin Ahmed Ismail, 18.
"There is crime here," said Simon McGill, a resident. "But the only weapons we have seen used in the past are things like golf clubs, not knives and never guns."
Detectives say this is a difficult inquiry whose findings have exposed stark contradictions. The Guardian understands that the boys were killed with a small-calibre weapon, something like a .22 or .32 handgun ? an illegal firearm which only reaches the streets as a result of gun trafficking by organised criminals.
Yet police sources say they have found nothing to suggest the boys had crossed any criminal gangs, were killed in a gangland feud, had dealt drugs in any major way or owed any money to someone who might collect their debts in such a violent way.
Sources said the only criminal history between the pair involved minor public order issues. "What has happened is completely and utterly out of proportion to any level of criminality they might have been involved in. That's what's so shocking," said one source. "It is the nature of it ? shots to the head at close range with an illegal firearm ? which is so uncomfortable."
What is becoming apparent, as detectives piece together the lives of the two seemingly ordinary young men, is that the motive for their murders may lie in something far more prosaic than retribution by a drug gang.
Police are focusing on something detectives in London and other cities are accustomed to ? the willingness of some young people to use extreme levels of violence to settle even minor scores.
"Sadly, it could be that this is the result of just a commonplace dispute, a slight, which on the face of it doesn't amount to anything, but which has been dealt with by violence which is off the scale," the Guardian was told.
Mohamed Farah's brothers, who flew in from their home in Norway after his death, said they knew of nothing in his life that could have led to such a demise.
"This was our little brother and what has been said about him about drugs and drug debts is a lie and it is insulting," said Gabriel Farah. "It doesn't reflect the brother we know."
In the alley where the boys died three small candles and a few bunches of flowers mark the place they were gunned down. On one bouquet a note reads: "RIP 'Mo'. You will be missed. Sleep tight". Another says, simply: "So young."
Most residents knew Mohamed Farah well. One of five children, he was born in Norway, where his family made their home after leaving Somalia in the 80s. He moved to Milton Keynes with his mother and two siblings in the late 90s and attended local schools.
He moved later to Birmingham with his family and, his brothers said, he had intended to study for a BTec at university. "He just hasn't been here long enough to get to know any drug gangs or get into debt," said Gabriel Farah. "These are the kind of lies we have read in some of the papers about him, and they are insulting."
"We were very close, he used to tell me everything and he mentioned nothing of having any problems," said Hakeem, another brother. Farah had only recently returned to the UK from Somalia, on 26 April, where he was visiting his father. He then spent time in Birmingham and London, where the second victim, Ismail, lived, before both boys arrived on the estate, where Farah still has family.
One friend, known as J, said he had been with the two before they were killed. "We played PS3 together and then they left. I knew 'Mo' [Farah] best. I knew the other guy as Mustafa. There was nothing wrong with them that night, they weren't scared or nothing. It's all bollocks what has been said about him, about gangs and stuff. We don't have those kind of gangs around here. It's not the New York 'hood round here, it's the Fishermead and Mo was peaceful."
At 9.35pm a CCTV camera filmed the boys five minutes away from the Fishermead at the Xscape entertainments centre ? home to the town's snow slope and 16-screen cinema.
At 9.50pm they were seen back on the estate near the X-Trim Barbers. Shortly afterwards J was at a kebab van a few blocks away. "I heard two shots," he said. "I got my food and sat down with it and heard another shot."
The first gunshot hit Farah in the head, killing him almost instantly. The gunman then turned his weapon on Ismail, aiming at his head, and firing twice. Police have not recovered the weapon.
A few days ago the families said their goodbyes in the hospital mortuary, supporting each other in their grief. "He was the only boy in the family and grew up with his four sisters who he loved very much," Ismail's family said. "He will be missed very much."
Back on the estate there was talk of the kind of retaliation police had hoped would not spring from the killings. "Two innocent people have been killed, something has got to happen, man," said a friend of Farah.
"A beating is one thing around here, a stabbing even, but being shot in the head is just something else and something has to happen."
In an effort to stimulate information a ¡Ì5,000 reward has been offered through Crimestoppers. Six people have been arrested and released without charge.
Detective Superintendent Rob Mason, who is leading the Thames Valley police investigation, said: "I am aware that the fact we have not charged anyone yet may start to cause frustration within the community.
"Investigations like this are complex and include a large amount of forensic analysis which inevitably takes time. Each and everyone one of us is focused on bringing charges against the person or people responsible."
A police officer was shot and wounded in the arm during what was believed to be a murder attempt by dissident republicans in Belfast on Sunday night.
The officer was shot in the arm in the forecourt of a petrol station on the Crumlin Road, north Belfast at about 7.30pm. His injuries were not life threatening and his condition in hospital has been described as stable.
Up to seven shots were fired from a car at a Police Service of Northern Ireland police (PSNI) patrol in Edenderry. Local reports said that the car used in the drive-by shooting was later seen being driven into the nearby republican Ardoyne district. Police, who said one person was arrested in connection with the shooting, closed off the Crumlin Road as part of a follow-up security operation.
Dissident republicans have a base in the Ardoyne-Oldpark area of north Belfast and have been actively targeting police officers over the past few years.
This latest shooting happened not far from a junction on the Crumlin Road where the New IRA fired a homemade rocket at a passing police patrol last year. No one was killed or seriously injured in that incident.
Mark Lindsay, the chairman of the Police Federation for Northern Ireland, which represents more than 90% of officers in the region, described Sunday¡¯s attack as appalling. ¡°The police serve the entire community and wounding one individual is an attack on the entire community. This attempted murder underlines the fragility of our peace,¡± he said.
Arlene Foster, the outgoing Northern Ireland first minister and leader of the Democratic Unionist party, condemned the shooting and said it was ¡°the work of cowards¡±. Her DUP colleague, North Belfast MP Nigel Dodds, said it was deeply disturbing.
Gerry Kelly, the North Belfast Sinn Fein assembly representative, said those responsible had ¡°absolutely nothing to offer society and need to call a halt to these activities immediately¡±.
James Brokenshire, the Northern Ireland secretary, said he was ¡°shocked and appalled¡± at the attack. ¡°To attack officers who are going about their daily duty protecting the entire community is sickening,¡± he said.
He was joined in his condemnation by the Irish foreign minister, Charlie Flanagan, who tweeted: ¡°I condemn tonight¡¯s shooting in North Belfast & injury to a PSNI officer. No excuse for such criminality. I wish the officer a full recovery.¡±
Nichola Mallon, the Social Democratic and Labour party assembly member in north Belfast, said: ¡°Those responsible for this attack, not only on the individual involved but on the progress that north Belfast has made, must be brought to justice. This community has rejected the men of violence before and it will do so again.¡±
The former lord mayor added: ¡°There will be no cover given to those who seek to destabilise our progress and bring mayhem back to our streets. I would encourage anyone with any information whatsoever to bring it forward to the police.¡±
The murder attempt comes at a time of renewed political instability in Northern Ireland. The region faces fresh elections to the assembly at Stormont following the collapse of the last power-sharing government.
A fortnight ago, the deputy first minister, Martin McGuinness, resigned from his post triggering the fall of the devolved administration. His decision was prompted by the refusal of Foster to stand down from her position while a public inquiry was held into a botched green energy scheme that is going to cost the taxpayer up to ¡Ì50m.
Fifty-seven of those injured in the Paris attacks remain in intensive care on Thursday, three of them in a critical state, following an unprecedented medical emergency for French hospital staff and what one stunned doctor called ¡°the surgery of war¡±.
About 221 people are still in hospital, the association of Paris hospitals said, from a total of 433 injured in last Friday¡¯s multiple shootings. Some can be expected to be discharged within days, while others will undergo long-term rehabilitation for severe life-changing injuries. All are being offered treatment from specialists for psychological trauma.
The injured were spread across the French capital, with the gravely hurt treated in 35 different operating theatres. According to doctors, the situation has now normalised following an extraordinary 12 hours which saw French medical staff grapple with the highest number of gunshot wounds since the second world war.
One surgeon, Remy Nizard, said staff who turned up voluntarily late on Friday and in the early hours of Saturday were faced with a range of traumatic injuries. They included numerous fractures to the leg, femur, foot and humerus. ¡°It was the surgery of war,¡± he told Le Monde, adding: ¡°Some people arrived with a shot in the head or neck. They presented with burst eye sockets. There was a significant risk of losing the eye.¡±
At the Georges Pompidou European hospital the 49 unconscious patients who arrived overwhelmed the facility and its usual procedures. ¡°Doctors didn¡¯t know who they were. They wrote numbers on the foreheads and hands of the wounded,¡± Morgane, a 26-year-old nurse, whose colleague works in the critical care unit said. She added: ¡°It was horrible. She was absolutely shocked.¡±
¡°These people had injuries from war weapons. It¡¯s the sort of thing you might expect from the battlefield,¡± said Philippe Juvin, the hospital¡¯s head of casualty,. Of his staff he added: ¡°Nobody has come out of this untouched. Everybody has been affected. They are all very tired, physically and psychologically. There¡¯s such sadness.¡±
He added: ¡°We have a psychiatrist at their disposal. To be frank I don¡¯t know why they¡¯ve been affected in this way. We are used to dealing with injuries of this nature. We get shootings. But not in such huge numbers. Not 50 in one go.¡±
The Georges Pompidou, where some of the most severely injured were treated, is a sprawling glass building close to France¡¯s defence ministry. Its flags were at half mast on Thursday; patients with ordinary injuries hobbled in and out; the first-floor accident and emergency ward again a place of calm.
In an eerie coincidence, last Friday morning Paris¡¯s ambulance, fire services and hospitals had rehearsed a scenario based on a Charlie Hebdo-style attack, with more than 100 casualties from shooting. Hours later this scenario happened for real. The wounded were distributed smoothly across at least five city hospitals, with an emergency plan activated.
According to Jacques Duranteau, an anaesthetist at the Bicetre hospital, medical teams have come out of the acute phase. The situation was now returning to normal, he said.¡°There may be a few adjustments, but today patients are where they should be.
¡°Some of the victims will be starting long months of treatment and rehabilitation. Those who are seriously injured will have to have specific treatment. For them care will be physical and psychological. The stress they have gone through is of an unimaginable level.¡±
Those wounded are recovering in at least five different hospitals across the city. One is the hospital Saint Louis, which is immediately across the road from Le Carillon cafe bar and a Cambodian restaurant. A gunman shot and killed 14 people here, metres away from the hospital entrance. Last weekend members of the public queued here for three hours to give blood, next to a mound of growing floral tributes and candles.
Staff at the Pitie salpetriere, one of Europe¡¯s largest hospitals, and a major teaching centre, were also returning to normal after a harrowing few days. Surgeons dealt with 52 people, 25 of whom were critical. ¡°Things have returned to normal. Our teams faced Dante-esque conditions,¡± Bruno Riou, the emergency ward chief, told Le Monde. He added: ¡°More than 50 people had been shot. There¡¯s no precedent in France.¡±
The hospital¡¯s medical director Pierre Carli described his colleagues¡¯ response as ¡®exceptional¡¯. ¡°We were dealing with injuries caused by weapons of war. This isn¡¯t our normal job. This is normally the work of people operating in conflict zones.
¡°We identified after Charlie Hebdo that if we have to take victims we will have to take large numbers, in different places, at the same time. We¡¯ve been working on this hypothesis since the summer ¡¦ We did a rehearsal on Friday morning. As we know now we were close to reality. We could never have imagined reality would have been worse.¡±
The 129 people who were killed on Friday have all now been identified. One of the last to be confirmed dead was Lola Ouzounian, aged 17. The daughter of a journalism professor, she was shot dead along with 88 others on Friday night in the Bataclan theatre.
US congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords stood among cheering, crying colleagues to say goodbye Wednesday, more than a year after she was gravely wounded by a would-be assassin.
Giffords had come to resign, a formality since she'd signaled her intention earlier, as she recovers from a gunshot wound to the head during a shooting rampage in her home district in Arizona. Democrats and Republicans lined up to see her off. A prolonged standing ovation followed tributes and tears.
In her resignation letter, Giffords said she had "more work to do on my recovery before I can again serve in elected office".
Last January, a gunman opened fire at Giffords' "Congress on Your Corner" event, killing six people and wounding 13.
"I don't remember much from that terrible day, but I have never forgotten my constituents, my colleagues or the millions of Americans with whom I share great hopes for this nation," Giffords said in the letter to House speaker John Boehner.
Giffords slowly made her way to the podium where she handed the letter to a teary-eyed Boehner.
House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi said Giffords had become "an inspiring symbol of determination and courage to millions of Americans ¡¦ Her message of bipartisanship and civility is one that all in Washington and in the nation should emulate."
Giffords' mother, Gloria, and husband, retired navy captain Mark Kelly, watched from the gallery. Giffords had announced on Sunday in a web video that she would resign.
"She just needs some more time, whether it's a year or two years or three years, I'm very confident she's going to have a long and effective career as a public servant," Kelly said.
Three camels belonging to a remote Aboriginal community in the Kimberley have been found dead from gunshot and arrow wounds, leaving elders ¡°devastated¡±.
Nyikina Mangala elder Harry Watson happened upon the dead camels while taking a group of tourists through Mount Anderson station near Jarlmadangah, 225km east of Broome, on Friday.
One camel, a breeding bull named One Arm, was shot through the chest. Two other camels were found nearby.
Harry Watson¡¯s nephew, Anthony Watson, told Guardian Australia some of the camels had apparently been shot with arrows.
¡°They used bows and arrows and shoot them through the stomach, it¡¯s not a clean kill,¡± Watson said. ¡°I hope the police charge those who did it with animal cruelty. It just makes the animals suffer.¡±
Watson said two men in camouflage gear had allegedly been seen in the area, but left after being confronted by members of the community who were acting as tour guides.
Police from the nearby community of Looma were called and are investigating the incident.
Watson said his uncle was devastated by the loss of the animals.
¡°It devastated him because he has had them for about 20 years, they¡¯re like pets,¡± he said. ¡°These were camels that were in the yard. They¡¯re not wild, they never run away, they just stood there and lie down when they approached them.¡±
The Watsons have about 20 camels which are used for tourist rides in their business, Kimberley Dreamtime Adventure Tours. The business is based at Mount Anderson station, where Harry Watson and his brother John, both Nyikina Mangala elders, were born. The brothers got a grant to buy the 94,000 hectare station in the 1980s. In 1987 they founded the Jarlmadangah Buru community, which now has a permanent population of about 60.
Anthony Watson said it was disheartening to face an attack on the business, which employs a number of community members.
¡°[Harry] has been doing his camel business for over 15 years and it¡¯s a lot of hard work,¡± Watson said.
¡°We¡¯re trying to break into the market and get the name out there. It hurts our business to lose a handful of camels in those circumstances.¡±
There are about 150,000 feral camels in Western Australia ? almost half the total feral camel population in Australia ? but they are found in the central desert region, not the Fitzroy Valley.
Watson said it was highly unlikely someone would have assumed the Mount Anderson camels were feral and, even if they did, the animals were shot without permission on Aboriginal-owned land.
¡°There are risks of crossfire, to have hunting without permission near the community,¡± he said. ¡°It¡¯s really disappointing.¡±
The family of an Oklahoma man shot to death outside his home are pointing to a history of criminal charges and racial slurs by the alleged killer.
Stanley Majors, 61, was arrested on Friday for first-degree murder by police in the city of Tulsa, over allegations that he shot and killed his neighbor, Khalid Jabara.
Members of Jabara¡¯s family issued statements after his death suggesting that police should have intervened sooner.
¡°My family lived in fear of this man and his hatred for years,¡± read a statement from the family. ¡°Yet in May, not even one year after he ran over our mother and despite our repeated protests, he was released from jail with no conditions on his bond ? no ankle monitor, no drug/alcohol testing, nothing.¡±
According to a police report, Majors told the mother in March 2015: ¡°Fuck you and I want to kill you¡±, in an incident that violated a protective order the family had against Majors. The mother said Majors used ¡°multiple racial slurs¡± while standing in a driveway, the report said.
Victoria Jabara Williams, who purports to be Jabara¡¯s sister, described Majors on Facebook as a ¡°monster¡± who called her family ¡°dirty Arabs¡± and shot Jabara on his front porch only a half hour after police left his home.
¡°At the end of the day, my beautiful brother had a heart like no other,¡± she wrote. ¡°Sensitive to the core, he loved others so much and wanted to be loved back.¡± Jabara¡¯s family couldn¡¯t be reached for comment on Monday.
Last September, Majors was charged with multiple felonies for striking Jabara¡¯s mother with a vehicle, leaving her with a broken left shoulder and injuries to her face, according to the charging document.
Majors drove away from the scene ¡°without seeing to the welfare¡± of the victim, who was transported for emergency care, according to an arrest report. When officers arrived, the report said, Majors was ¡°extremely unsteady on his feet as he was stumbling around and falling¡±.
Police said he had bloodshot eyes, slurred his speech, and was ¡°actively urinating, without the use of his hands, through his open pants¡±.
The incident violated a protection order issued by Jabara¡¯s mother against Majors, which stated he not have ¡°any contact¡± with her. It was the second time he violated the order.
Court records confirm that Majors was released on bail after more than eight months in jail, and that the charges against him were still pending.
The shooting took place just minutes after law enforcement had responded to a call from Jabara about Majors, according to Tulsa police homicide sergeant Dave Walker.
Jabara, 37, called police around 5pm on Friday about ¡°someone knocking on his windows¡±, Walker told the Guardian. Jabara then had a conversation with Majors, and ¡°the suspect told [Jabara] that someone fired shots into the house¡±, he said. Jabara responded that he didn¡¯t hear gunshots.
¡°I do not know what was told to the officers that arrived, but they left the call at 6.40pm,¡± Walker said.
Eight minutes later, police received another call: Jabara had been shot.
Following the incident, Majors pointed his gun at a witness and then fled on foot, according to a release from Tulsa police. When first responders arrived, they transported Jabara, 37, to a nearby hospital where he died from his wounds, police said.
As police were obtaining a search warrant for Majors¡¯ home, he was discovered hiding behind a tree at a nearby library. It¡¯s unclear how long he was behind the tree. Police arrested Majors, but before he could be interviewed, ¡°he became ill and had to be transported to the hospital¡±, police said. Officers recovered a single handgun, and no other suspects are being sought.
A motive is unclear, police said on Saturday, as ¡°we have not been able to talk to Majors¡±.
Court records and interviews reveal a contentious history between the family and Majors.
Since the beginning of 2015, police have responded to over 50 calls to Majors¡¯ residence, but Walker said on Monday that he couldn¡¯t confirm what they were about or in reference to. ¡°Some are alarm calls and report calls,¡± he said. In the same timeframe, police received 20 calls from Jabara¡¯s residence, he added, and ¡°several of those refer to Majors¡±.
In the hit-and-run case, prosecutors disclosed that Tulsa police were aware of ongoing ¡°neighborly disturbances¡± between Majors and the family. One officer testified he had been dispatched to the Jabara household three times in one day following complaints about Majors, according to court records.
On the date Majors allegedly struck Jabara¡¯s mother, an officer said there was a dispute over a vehicle parked the wrong way in the street, records indicate.
¡°The defendant discussed the disputes going on between the two households, including telling [the officer] that the victim and her family were ¡°filthy Lebanese¡± and that ¡°they throw gay people off the roof¡±, according to a court filing.
A message was left for an attorney representing Jabara¡¯s mother.
Majors himself sought a protection order against Jabara, claiming he trespassed and vandalized his home in December 2014. Majors said that Jabara knocked on his door at ¡°all hours, emailed him threats and used his address to order computer products¡±, according to the petition for a protection order.
A judge the following month ruled that Jabara had to remain 30 feet from Majors ¡°at all times¡± and refrain from having any contact with him whatsoever. Majors later sued Jabara for $1,500 related to damage in his kitchen. Jabara wasn¡¯t criminally charged in connection with the incident, court records indicate.
In the Facebook post, Williams described Jabara as a loving sibling with quick wit.
¡°I¡¯ll miss his jokes (I stole all my jokes from him!),¡± she said, ¡°his love for all things electronic, his love for my mom and dad, Rami, and this tenderness toward his nieces.¡±
¡°This angel will be missed,¡± she continued. ¡°Love you, Khalid.¡±
Thousands of people have been murdered by guns in Chicago since 2007 ? but is there any relationship between the location of gun shops outside the city and the murders just over the city limits? This map shows every gun-related homicide and licensed weapons dealers. Do you know Chicago? What do you think it tells us?Gunshot homicides from RedeyeChicago , Firearms licensed dealers from the ATF under a FOIA request Includes all homicides recorded on the database from 2007 to 10 February 2013
A gun attack in suburban Pittsburgh on Wednesday evening that left five people dead was orchestrated by two people, officials have said.
Allegheny County district attorney Stephen Zappala said Thursday that the gunmen had planned to target at least one of the victims.
Police are still searching for the gunmen, who fled from the scene on foot after killing four women and a man in the borough of Wilkinsburg. At least three others are in hospital, where two men are in critical condition and one woman is stable.
Police said people scrambled from the backyard toward the house as bullets began flying. Four of the victims were found dead on the back porch. The other died at a hospital.
The Allegheny County medical examiner¡¯s office identified the victims. Jerry Shelton, 25, was killed in the attack, with his sisters: Chanetta Powell, 25, and Brittany Powell, 27, who was pregnant. Tina Shelton, 37, and Shada Mahone, 26, also died in the shooting.
Allegheny County police superintendent Charles Moffatt said there were six homicides in the case, because Powell was eight months pregnant.
No suspects are in custody and a motive was not immediately known.
A photograph of the shooting location, posted by local TV WPXI reporter Jennifer Tomazic, shows remnants of a backyard cookout, with a barbecue, strewn chairs and trash littered about.
Zappala said the crime scene was one of the worst he¡¯s seen in his 18-year career. ¡°This was a planned, calculated murder,¡± he said.
Officials said Wilkinsburg police officers were called to the scene at 10.54pm to find eight people with gunshot wounds.
¡°It would appear from early examination of the scene that a backyard party/cookout was being held at the rear of the home,¡± an official press release said. ¡°The ballistic evidence on the scene leads police to believe that two different weapons were discharged from two different people.¡±
Lieutenant Andrew Schurman of the Allegheny County homicide unit said the gunmen had barged into the party and opened fire in an ambush-style attack.
He said police do not believe anyone at the party fired back.
¡°It looks like right now they were all fleeing toward the back door of the residence when the second gunman fired from the side of the yard,¡± Schurman said. ¡°They all seemed to get caught on the back porch.¡±
Jessica Shelton said on Thursday that she was the mother of the three siblings killed in the shooting, and an aunt of the two others. She said at a press conference that the family decided to have a cookout because of the nice weather.
¡°It was a nice day so we just called each other on the phone and said, ¡®Hey, we¡¯re having a cookout.¡¯¡±
Resident Kayla Alexander told WPXI-TV that she heard a barrage of gunshots ? more than 20.
Some bullets passed through three different victims, said Chris Taylor, assistant special agent in charge with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
Wilkinsburg mayor John Thompson, a member of Mayors Against Illegal Guns, extended his condolences to the families of the victims. ¡°While details are still unfolding, I can say for certain that there is more we can do to reduce the senseless violence that claims 91 American lives every day ? and injures hundreds more,¡± he said.
Wilkinsburg is a residential neighbourhood of about 16,000 people, 13km (eight miles) east of Pittsburgh. It is a poor suburb known for drug violence, but the particular street the shooting took place on is usually quiet, neighbours said.
James Boyd, 70, has lived just three doors away from the home where the shooting took place for 24 years and hear the attack take place. ¡°I thought it was maybe the pipes bursting. But then we realised it was gunshots,¡± Boyd told the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, noting that gunfire ¡°went on for almost a minute¡±.
¡°We¡¯ve had trouble in this neighbourhood before but never this close to home,¡± Boyd said. ¡°I¡¯ve never seen anything like this before.¡±
Groups of residents were reported to be gathered on the street, some of them sobbing and saying they had lost family members. Dozens of shell casings littered the pavement of an alleyway near the site, where police were gathering evidence and talking to witnesses.
Vehicles from the medical examiner¡¯s office arrived in the early hours of Thursday to remove the victims¡¯ bodies.
Pennsylvania senator Bob Casey, a Democrat, said the shooting showed the need for action to stop gun violence. ¡°Mourning the loss of life after shooting in Wilkinsburg. We must take action to #stopgunviolence,¡± he wrote on Twitter.
Katie McGinty, who is running for the state¡¯s other senate seat, said in a statement that the attack show the immediate need for action to stop gun violence.
¡°We cannot simply grieve for this tragedy, wring our hands, and move on,¡± McGinty said. ¡°These acts of violence occur far too often in our society. Pennsylvanians demand more of our leaders to fight the scourge of gun violence.¡±
Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this report.
A teenage army recruit who was found dead at a British barracks more than 20 years ago may have been raped or ordered by a superior to have sex, an inquest has been told.
Pte Cheryl James, 18, was one of four young soldiers who died of gunshot wounds as claims of bullying or abuse at the Deepcut barracks in Surrey circulated.
A new, full inquest is due to begin before a jury next month, but a barrister for James¡¯s family told a preliminary hearing that new evidence had come to light.
Alison Foster QC told the hearing at Woking coroner¡¯s court she had material suggesting James ¡°may have been sexually coerced or raped the night before, or before the time of her death¡±.
She said: ¡°There is now a direct allegation that Cheryl might have been ordered to sleep with the person we are calling Witness A by someone superior in rank to her.
This is not fraternising. This is not an illicit sexual relationship between two young people across the ranks. This is something quite different.
¡°This new material gives a sinister and very different slant involving the pressure of third parties on persons to have sexual intercourse or other relations against their will.
¡°This gives a climate or culture that can promote desperation and desperate emotions and matters highly relevant to her state of mind, and the culture in which such matters could continue.¡±
Foster also told the coroner that she would present evidence of ¡°manipulation within the chain of command¡±.
James¡¯s family want the scope of a new inquest into the teenager¡¯s death to be widened to take account of new testimony, which they argue sheds new light on her state of mind.
James, from from Llangollen, north Wales, was found dead with a bullet wound to her head in November 1995 while she was undergoing initial training at the barracks.
She was one of four soldiers who died at Deepcut between 1995 and 2002. Privates Sean Benton, James Collinson and Geoff Gray also died from gunshot wounds.
An open verdict was returned on James¡¯s death after a hearing lasting just an hour in December 1995. Last year, however, the high court quashed the verdict and ordered a new inquest to be held. It is due to last seven weeks.
Following the high court¡¯s decision, James¡¯s family called for her body to be exhumed for further testing. This was done and bullet fragments were recovered. Her body was reburied with her family present after a short ceremony.
The full inquest is due to consider whether a third party was involved in James¡¯s death and what happened on the evening before she died.
It will also address whether there were shortcomings with barrack policies on sexual behaviour, supervision of young females, drugs, alcohol and accommodation.
Coroner Brian Barker QC said he would make a written ruling on whether to widen the scope of the inquest in the next few weeks.
Nicholas Moss, representing the Ministry of Defence, said that the material put forward by James¡¯s family was nothing new and cautioned against conducting ¡°satellite investigations¡±, saying it was inappropriate to look into other cases during the inquest. He said: ¡°This cannot be dressed as new evidence, it is evidence that has been there all along.¡±
The full inquest will refocus attention on culture within the army in recent years. Last week it apologised for its treatment of Pte Gavin Williams, 22, who died after undergoing a gruelling ¡°beasting¡± punishment at a barracks in Wiltshire.
A 29-year-old man who "cold-bloodedly executed" a father of four as he slept with his partner and three-year-old son has been jailed for a minimum of 30 years.
South Yorkshire police confirmed Martin Fieldhouse was found guilty at Sheffield crown court today of murdering Lee Gray, 32.
Gray was found dead at his home in Worsbrough Dale, Barnsley, South Yorkshire, on 5 March last year. He had suffered a gunshot wound to the head.
The jury heard how Gray's partner, Keeley Jones, and the boy were not woken by the shot.
Prosecutors said it was a case of mistaken identity as Fieldhouse thought it was his brother in bed with Jones.
The judge jailed Fieldhouse for life. He ordered him to serve a minimum of 30 years before he is considered for release.
Gray's mother, Jane Gray, said: "The trial has taken over our lives since Lee was killed nearly two years ago.
"Our lives have been put on hold. Not only does Lee leave behind four children, there is a void left in the hearts of all his family and close friends.
"Lee was a popular, loving dad and put a smile on everyone's face. These are the memories we will cherish."
Detective inspector Kevin Brown of South Yorkshire police, said: "Martin Fieldhouse cold-bloodedly executed Lee Gray while he slept in his bed with his partner and three-year-old son.
"Throughout the last 18 months Fieldhouse has shown no regret. In fact, he's concocted conspiracy theories that the majority of the witnesses had lied to get him into trouble.
"Thankfully the jury saw through these lies and found him guilty today.
"Throughout this time Lee's family and friends have acted with dignity, supporting the police to reach today's conclusion."
Police officers who arrived at the wrong metro Atlanta home after a report of suspicious activity shot the man who lives there, killed his dog and ¡°likely¡± shot a fellow officer, leaving him seriously wounded, authorities said Tuesday.
Christopher McKinley ran bleeding outside where a neighbor heard him asking, ¡°Why did they come in my house? Why did they shoot me? Why did they shoot my dog?¡±
The incident began when DeKalb County police received a report of a possible burglary at a one-story residence near an intersection in southeast Atlanta. Lacking an exact address, the officers were sent in the dark to a neighborhood where many of the single-story homes look similar.
Three officers found a home they thought matched a description provided by a 911 caller, but were unable to make contact with anyone inside, according to a statement from the Georgia Bureau of Investigation. They entered the home through an unlocked rear door and two officers fired their guns at a dog, killing it.
McKinley, 36, was also shot in the leg by police, GBI officials said. Officer Travis Jones was shot in the hip and listed in serious condition at Grady Memorial Hospital. The GBI released the names of the two wounded men Tuesday evening.
¡°Early investigation indicates that the injured officer was likely shot accidently by one of the other officers on the scene,¡± GBI officials said in a statement.
However, GBI spokesman Scott Dutton said it was too early to determine exactly who fired the gunshots. Dutton said he did not know if anyone in the home was armed besides the police. GBI officials said there is no evidence residents there had committed any crimes.
McKinley returned home early Tuesday, limping and wearing hospital scrubs, but declined to comment.
Tama Colson, who lives two doors down from the home where the shooting erupted, said she was coming home from a walk when she saw police cars speed past and soon heard a series of gunshots.
Colson told The Associated Press that as she rounded the corner, she saw her wounded neighbor and his wife fleeing their home. McKinley¡¯s wife was screaming, Colson said, and he was yelling: ¡°They shot me and they shot my dog!¡±
Colson said her neighbor had a bullet wound a couple of inches above his right knee.
She said she knelt beside him in the yard and used a shirt to staunch the bleeding as he told her what happened.
¡°He told me they were in the house watching television when they heard something in the backyard,¡± Colson said. ¡°The husband gets up to check, opens the door and he just sees shooting. He gets hit and his dog is dead.¡±
She said police never questioned McKinley while she was there helping him.
Derek Perez told The AP that he reported the suspicious person, but at a different house than the one police entered. He said he was walking his dog when he saw a man knock on a neighbor¡¯s door and then just stand in the yard. He said he then heard a loud noise, a dog barking and didn¡¯t see the man anymore. There had been break-ins in the neighborhood recently, so he called 911, he said.
Bob Gilman, who lives nearby, said he heard police sirens Monday night, went outside and saw his neighbor sitting on the driveway, wounded. Gilman said police officers escorted him away before he could ask what had happened. He was stunned that officers had opened fire.
¡°If they say they had the wrong address, that¡¯s very frightening,¡± Gilman said.
The wounded man¡¯s dog, a brindle boxer, was large, playful and would run up to people. Gilman said the dog never attacked others. The wounded man¡¯s home had been hit by previous break-ins, and the man told Gilman that he owned a shotgun and a handgun.
DeKalb County police chief Cedric Alexander said his agency would normally investigate a non-fatal shooting. But given the complicated circumstances, he said he asked the GBI to lead the probe involving his own officers¡¯ actions.
Alexander acknowledged Monday night that DeKalb officers responded to the wrong home. All three officers ? identified by the GBI as Jones, Quhanna Lloyd and Timothy Harden ? have been placed on administrative leave.
Police officers have mistakenly forced their way inside homes before in Atlanta, at least once with deadly consequences.
In 2006, Atlanta police officers killed a 92-year-old woman during a botched drug raid at her house.
Foot and mouth was blamed for troubles which drove Glyn Lewis, 59, from Llwyn-y-maes, to hang himself in a shed full of cattle on April 21.
The mid-Wales county of Powys, where the three men lived, has suffered the worst foot and mouth outbreak in the country, with 54 of 92 cases recorded in Wales.
Coroner John Hollins told the inquest, one of three held at Welshpool town hall, that Mr Lewis had not used his lorry for seven weeks because he was afraid of carrying the disease to areas unaffected by the disease.
Despite foot and mouth not being confirmed on his 90-acre farm, his cattle and sheep were due to be culled.
John Mostyn, a friend of Mr Lewis, said the farmer thought his business was "finished". He told the hearing: "His mood changed with the outbreak of foot and mouth. I used to say 'We are not finished, Glyn' but no one could persuade him any other way."
PC Matthew Thomas said Mr Lewis had become worried when he could not help others fight the disease. "Mr Lewis was suffering because of the constraints of foot-and-mouth. He did not want to take the risk of bringing it to the area.
"His cattle were to be culled in the next couple of days; it seems that his business was a huge part of his life. He was a very, very popular man and being the sort of person he was, he wanted to help everyone then worried when he could not."
The second farmer John Bayliss, 56, was found dead from a single gunshot wound to his head at the family's Borfa Wen farm in Kerry, Newtown, in April.
The inquest heard that although none of his cattle had been confirmed as having foot and mouth, the farm had had restrictions placed on it.
PC Clare Dolphin told the hearing a restrictionnotice had been placed on the farm because a contractor who had been on an affected farm had visited it.
Mr Bayliss had received the notice on the same day he had been given clearance to move his stock for the first time since the start of the outbreak, she said.
Mr Bayliss's wife, Rita, told the inquest: "There were lambs everywhere. They were dirty and wet and couldn't be moved."
A third farmer, Brian Oakley, 54, who had a 20 year history of depression, was found hanged in March. He had suffered a breakdown at the end of the 1990s caused by the crisis in the farming industry which resulted in falling prices, from which he never recovered.
His wife, Gillian, told the inquest that the couple had been forced to sell their 270 acre farm and move to a smaller one at Llanfechain in mid-Wales.
Mr Hollis said he was certain that foot and mouth and BSE had exacerbated the situations. "The crisis in the farming industry has been catastrophic for the families of these three decent men and their deaths are to be deeply regretted."
He called on the farming unions to find some way of reaching out and supporting members of the farming community affected by the recent crises, describing the deaths as "catastrophic".
The front line: meet those affected by the crisis
 20.04.2001: The jab of conscience 06.03.2001: Meet our panel
Interactive guides
How the virus spread across Britain
 The countryside in crisis
More on the countryside in crisis
 27.03.2001: Hard times
More on the election and foot and mouth
Politics: foot and mouth
From the Guardian archive
 28.11.1967, leader: indecision on foot and mouth
 18.11.1967: 'Slaughter must seem a cruel remedy'
 16.11.1967: Foot and mouth may cost agriculture more than ¡Ì12m
Special reports
Foot and mouth
 Election 2001: foot and mouth
 What's wrong with our food?
 BSE
 Countryside in crisis
Useful links
 Northumberland county council
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
National Farmers' Union
 Meat and livestock commission
World organisation for animal health
Ramblers Association
Hard-pressed GPs lack the resources to deal with new firearm licensing arrangements designed to keep guns out of the hands of those medically unfit to have access to them, doctors have warned.
The British Medical Association annual conference in Belfast on Wednesday comfortably passed a motion expressing its concerns over the changes in gun licensing introduced in April.
The motion said the changes place undue burden on practices to report on every application for a gun licence, leaves the element of discretion too broad in reporting depression, and places the GP in the vulnerable position of having to decide when to report any deterioration in the health of a patient flagged on their notes as a firearms holder. The question of whether to charge a fee for the service is also an issue.
Under the changes, police will contact the GP of all those who apply for a firearm certificate to check whether there is a history of conditions including depression and dementia. Previously, police only contacted an individual¡¯s GP before the issue of a firearm certificate if an applicant declared a relevant medical condition. The new referral system was drawn up after consultations between the police, the Home Office, the Royal College of General Practitioners, the BMA and shooting associations. Police will have the final say on who is issued a firearms certificate.
¡°Under the old system, GPs were asked, ¡®do you have concerns?¡¯ after licences were given, which is a bit like closing the stable doors after the horses have bolted,¡± said Dr John Canning, a Middlesbrough-based GP. ¡°Now GPs are contacted at the application process.¡±
But Canning said GP involvement in the new licensing arrangements imposed further burdens on already hard-pressed surgeries. ¡°Their priority is to manage the illness of patients,¡± said Canning, who estimated the checks could take as long as six patient appointments.
GPs have also been told to keep a record of patients who own a gun ? and to inform police if any of these develop mental health problems such as depression. Practices are supposed to have a reminder on the patient record so that the GP is aware the person is a firearms certificate holder. Some doctors argue that most GPs are not suitably qualified to diagnose a personality disorder.
A doctors¡¯ group in Devon has issued a template letter for practices to turn down requests for information on firearms licence applications. The template, from the Devon local medical committee (LMC) states that GPs do not have the expertise to diagnose a personality disorder, described as the ¡°major clinical issue giving rise to the improper use of firearms¡±.
Dr Mark Sanford-Wood, who drafted the template letter, told the Pulse website for health professionals that LMC produced the letter because ¡°our members are at really significant risk if they try to offer an opinion that they¡¯re not qualified to offer¡±.
He added: ¡°I understand that if that letter is used in any kind of widespread way across the country that this system that was introduced on 1 April will collapse ... but that doesn¡¯t mean we shouldn¡¯t do it.¡±
The changes in the firearms licensing arrangements followed recommendations about the need for better provisions to be in place between police and GPs after several shootings. They included an incident in Peterlee, County Durham in 2012, when a man ? a licensed holder of firearms ? shot himself after killing three women from the same family.
Mathu, an employee in Sam¡¯s Chicken Shop, said one of the ¡°five or six¡± who were taken from the flat was Romanian or eastern European.
¡°He was about 22 or 23, he was a nice, quiet guy. He lived there with his brother and his girlfriend. They used to come in and order lunch, always ordered wings and chips.
¡°We suddenly hear something like a gunshot. A man rushed in and told us to stay in the shop.
¡°The shop was surrounded by police,¡± she said.
Mathu said the two men in the flat were definitely Romanian as they were regular customers and used to josh with him as his girlfriend, Janushan, 15, said there were also four black men who lived in the flat, one of whom he said was Somalian and wore ¡°brown Islamic dress¡±.
The stepson of the former gangster Dave Courtney has been shot dead in south London.
Genson Courtney, 23, was shot in the head and shoulder as he sat in a hired black VW Golf in Greenwich on Sunday night. He was taken to hospital with gunshot wounds and died on Monday morning at the Queen Elizabeth hospital in Woolwich.
Scotland Yard said officers were called to Banning Street in Greenwich at 10.50pm on Sunday after receiving reports of gunshots. Sources said the victim had been in a hire car and appeared to have been shot by a gunman who approached the car on foot. Detectives appealed for witnesses to contact them.
Scotland Yard's Trident unit, which specialises in gun crime, has launched a murder inquiry and officers are investigating the victim's background and recent associations. A spokeswoman said they were keeping an open mind about motive.
Detective Chief Inspector Mark Gower, who is leading the investigation, said: "At this early stage it is believed a male suspect may have ran from the scene in the direction of Christchurch Way shortly after the shooting.
"I would like to reassure anyone concerned about contacting the police that Trident has great expertise in protecting witnesses and there are a huge variety of measures that can be put in place to protect you."
Genson Courtney's stepfather claims to have been involved in debt-collecting, minding clubs, assault, contraband and murder. He has more recently become an actor and has had small roles in a number of gangster movies.
He claims to have been the model for Vinnie Jones's character Big Chris in the film Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels. He has had published six books, including an autobiography.
A profile on his website reads: "In his time, Dave has been shot, stabbed, had his nose bitten off (they sewed it back on) and has had to kill to stay alive himself."
Hard-pressed GPs lack the resources to deal with new firearm licensing arrangements designed to keep guns out of the hands of those medically unfit to have access to them, doctors have warned.
The British Medical Association annual conference in Belfast on Wednesday comfortably passed a motion expressing its concerns over the changes in gun licensing introduced in April.
The motion said the changes place undue burden on practices to report on every application for a gun licence, leaves the element of discretion too broad in reporting depression, and places the GP in the vulnerable position of having to decide when to report any deterioration in the health of a patient flagged on their notes as a firearms holder. The question of whether to charge a fee for the service is also an issue.
Under the changes, police will contact the GP of all those who apply for a firearm certificate to check whether there is a history of conditions including depression and dementia. Previously, police only contacted an individual¡¯s GP before the issue of a firearm certificate if an applicant declared a relevant medical condition. The new referral system was drawn up after consultations between the police, the Home Office, the Royal College of General Practitioners, the BMA and shooting associations. Police will have the final say on who is issued a firearms certificate.
¡°Under the old system, GPs were asked, ¡®do you have concerns?¡¯ after licences were given, which is a bit like closing the stable doors after the horses have bolted,¡± said Dr John Canning, a Middlesbrough-based GP. ¡°Now GPs are contacted at the application process.¡±
But Canning said GP involvement in the new licensing arrangements imposed further burdens on already hard-pressed surgeries. ¡°Their priority is to manage the illness of patients,¡± said Canning, who estimated the checks could take as long as six patient appointments.
GPs have also been told to keep a record of patients who own a gun ? and to inform police if any of these develop mental health problems such as depression. Practices are supposed to have a reminder on the patient record so that the GP is aware the person is a firearms certificate holder. Some doctors argue that most GPs are not suitably qualified to diagnose a personality disorder.
A doctors¡¯ group in Devon has issued a template letter for practices to turn down requests for information on firearms licence applications. The template, from the Devon local medical committee (LMC) states that GPs do not have the expertise to diagnose a personality disorder, described as the ¡°major clinical issue giving rise to the improper use of firearms¡±.
Dr Mark Sanford-Wood, who drafted the template letter, told the Pulse website for health professionals that LMC produced the letter because ¡°our members are at really significant risk if they try to offer an opinion that they¡¯re not qualified to offer¡±.
He added: ¡°I understand that if that letter is used in any kind of widespread way across the country that this system that was introduced on 1 April will collapse ... but that doesn¡¯t mean we shouldn¡¯t do it.¡±
The changes in the firearms licensing arrangements followed recommendations about the need for better provisions to be in place between police and GPs after several shootings. They included an incident in Peterlee, County Durham in 2012, when a man ? a licensed holder of firearms ? shot himself after killing three women from the same family.
Having chosen not to expose Barry George to cross-examination in the witness box, his defence lawyers targeted the only remaining piece of forensic evidence that could link him to Jill Dando's murder.
The single fibre of grey-blue polyester discovered on the raincoat worn by the BBC television presenter allegedly came from a pair of C&A trousers found at George's home. It provided "weak support" for the case against George, prosecution lawyers maintained.
But Dr Roger Robson, a former Home Office forensic scientist who runs his own consultancy, challenged the significance of the discovery - claiming the thread could have come from another source.
The raincoat had been left lying on the ground for between six and nine hours after the murder, Robson suggested. The fibre might have been dropped by anyone passing. "It could have come from the suits or trousers in Miss Dando's wardrobe or from [her fiance] Alan Farthing's wardrobe," he said. "It could have been contaminated by people walking past [on the path]."
The battery of tests carried out on the polyester fragment was not conclusive. One gave a negative result before turning positive when the test was run a second time.
Robson claimed the analysis did not back the case against George. "I would not be confident in putting any weight on the fibre," he said. "I would put in my report 'insufficient tests performed'."
Evidence at the original trial that convicted George included what were said to be traces of firearms residue found in his pocket and supposedly lodged there from the gun used to kill Dando.
That forensic remnant did not appear in the retrial, however, after the court of appeal ruled that the jury had been misled about the significance of the microscopic speck in his coat. The single thread attached to her coat was the only remaining forensic detail before the jury.
George's lawyers also brought in evidence from a neuropsychiatrist to dispute prosecution suggestions that he showed signs of "histrionics, paranoia and narcissism" and had a personality disorder.
Prof Michael Kopelman implied that George could not have been as calculating as alleged. "[He] described to me that he can be aware of what's going on around him but just can't respond," the professor said.
There was a family history of epilepsy as well as "severe cognitive impairment". George had an IQ of 75, in the lowest 5% of the population, Kopelman added. "I am sure that Mr George has inherited a gene or genes which predispose him to epilepsy or cognitive impairment," he said.He scored even lower, in the bottom 1%, in memory and "executive" tests, Kopelman added. These were "measures of his ability to plan and organise himself and to carry out or execute various things".
The court heard that during the height of the Irish troubles in the early 1980s, George went to his sister's wedding in Ireland and claimed he was in the SAS - a boast that nearly came close to getting him beaten up. George could not even remember how many children his sisters had, important dates, or his medication, the court heard.
Mathu, an employee in Sam¡¯s Chicken Shop, said one of the ¡°five or six¡± who were taken from the flat was Romanian or eastern European.
¡°He was about 22 or 23, he was a nice, quiet guy. He lived there with his brother and his girlfriend. They used to come in and order lunch, always ordered wings and chips.
¡°We suddenly hear something like a gunshot. A man rushed in and told us to stay in the shop.
¡°The shop was surrounded by police,¡± she said.
Mathu said the two men in the flat were definitely Romanian as they were regular customers and used to josh with him as his girlfriend, Janushan, 15, said there were also four black men who lived in the flat, one of whom he said was Somalian and wore ¡°brown Islamic dress¡±.
The stepson of the former gangster Dave Courtney has been shot dead in south London.
Genson Courtney, 23, was shot in the head and shoulder as he sat in a hired black VW Golf in Greenwich on Sunday night. He was taken to hospital with gunshot wounds and died on Monday morning at the Queen Elizabeth hospital in Woolwich.
Scotland Yard said officers were called to Banning Street in Greenwich at 10.50pm on Sunday after receiving reports of gunshots. Sources said the victim had been in a hire car and appeared to have been shot by a gunman who approached the car on foot. Detectives appealed for witnesses to contact them.
Scotland Yard's Trident unit, which specialises in gun crime, has launched a murder inquiry and officers are investigating the victim's background and recent associations. A spokeswoman said they were keeping an open mind about motive.
Detective Chief Inspector Mark Gower, who is leading the investigation, said: "At this early stage it is believed a male suspect may have ran from the scene in the direction of Christchurch Way shortly after the shooting.
"I would like to reassure anyone concerned about contacting the police that Trident has great expertise in protecting witnesses and there are a huge variety of measures that can be put in place to protect you."
Genson Courtney's stepfather claims to have been involved in debt-collecting, minding clubs, assault, contraband and murder. He has more recently become an actor and has had small roles in a number of gangster movies.
He claims to have been the model for Vinnie Jones's character Big Chris in the film Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels. He has had published six books, including an autobiography.
A profile on his website reads: "In his time, Dave has been shot, stabbed, had his nose bitten off (they sewed it back on) and has had to kill to stay alive himself."
On 14 May 2004, soldiers of the Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment were ambushed by Mahdi army fighters. The gunfight, during which the soldiers fought with everything from bayonets to tank shells, became known as the battle for Danny Boy, the name British troops gave to a junction on route 6, just south of Amara on the road to Basra. According to some British estimates at the time, up to 50 Iraqis were killed. A number of local residents claimed relatives tending nearby fields were caught up in the fighting. British forces also detained a number of men, and were seen transporting them from the battlefield. The next day, it appears that 22 bodies were handed over by British forces at Camp Abu Naji. The battle took place near Majar al-Kabir, where militants murdered six British military police officers, known as redcaps, six months earlier.
The father of an Iraqi killed by British forces during the battle, together with five other Iraqis who were detained on the same date, allege they were beaten and abused, during and after their original detention. They, and other witnesses, also allege that a far larger number of men were detained and transported from the battlefield and that, while their vision was obscured by blacked-out goggles, they overheard the unmistakable sounds of torture at the base. Public Interest Lawyers, a group representing the Iraqis, says this is corroborated by the death certificates to dead Iraqis who were handed over from the Abu Naji base. Evidence of torture included close-range bullet wounds, the removal of eyes, and stab wounds. The Iraqis have been asking the high court in London to order an independent public inquiry into claims they were mistreated and that British soldiers may have killed up to 20 captives.
In statements last year, five of the Iraqis tell of hearing other men screaming, moaning in pain and choking, and the sound of gunfire. One man, Atiyah Sayid Abdelreza said: "I believed people were being killed. I have never heard anything like that sound ever before in my life. It shocked me and filled me with such terror." The five detainees include two farmers, a student, a taxi driver and a baker, according to the statements. Their lawyers said they had "absolutely nothing" to do with the insurgent Mahdi army. Death certificates of Iraqis, disclosed at the time of the witness statements, described how they died. "Several gunshot wounds to body ? severance of sexual organs," one states. "Gunshot to head," another reads. One notes: "Gunshot in face, pulling out of the eye, breaking the jaw, gunshot to the chest." The witness statements implied that Iraqi men were executed by being shot at close range, strangled or having their throats cut, the lawyers said. British soldiers have said they were told to take some bodies of dead Iraqis back to their camp, though it is unclear why.
They want compensation for their alleged ordeal and a judicial review of the Ministry of Defence's failure to conduct a proper inquiry into the allegations. The Human Rights Act demands an independent public inquiry when there is prima facie evidence of serious wrongdoing by the state, lawyers have told the high court.
Allegations of mistreatment of Iraqi civilians at Abu Naji were first reported in the Guardian a month after the battle. Military police were asked to investigate and cleared the soldiers of wrongdoing. The MoD had until now opposed the application for a judicial review into the way it and military police responded to the allegations. Lawyers for the ministry argued the 20 who died were killed during fighting.
There is the well-documented killing of hotel worker Baha Mousa, 26, who was beaten to death in September 2003. Six soldiers were acquitted and one was jailed for a year. The MoD paid nearly ¡Ì2.8m to Mousa's family and nine other victims of abuse detained at the same time.
Two terminals at John F Kennedy airport are resuming normal operations after reports of shots fired caused chaos for travellers as people were evacuated and fights were grounded or diverted.
The reports were later determined to be unfounded and the New York airport was given the all-clear.
Port Authority police said they received reports of shots fired at Terminal 8 near the departures area at about 9.30pm on Sunday (1.30am BST). Police said they closed Terminal 1 following additional reports of shots fired.
However, in a briefing early on Monday, Joe Pentangelo, a Port Authority spokesman, said: ¡°At this time, no firearm, rounds, shell casings or other evidence of shots fired has been found.¡±
The New York police department¡¯s head of special operations tweeted that nothing suspicious had been found in a search of the terminals.A senior law enforcement official told NBC the security alert had been triggered when a woman coming off a plane reported hearing gunshots in Terminal 8.
One official said the noise could have been cheering and banging while passengers watched the Olympics.
The security alert led to travel chaos for thousands. The Federal Aviation Administration announced a ¡°full ground stop¡± on all air traffic arriving at JFK until 11.30pm. Some flights were diverted and tracking website Flightradar said delays in the area were increasing.
An expressway approaching JFK also was shut down. Passengers were allowed back into some terminals and flights began departing again at about midnight.
Images posted on social media during the evacuation showed scores of people standing outside the terminals.
Travellers who had been evacuated said police told them it was ¡°not safe¡± to stay inside.
People inside Terminal 8 described panic when the evacuation order was given.
One passenger onboard a plane that had landed at JFK said the aircraft was being held on the tarmac due to an emergency.
JFK, which has six terminals ? two have previously been demolished ? is the busiest international air passenger gateway into the US. More than 53 million people travelled through the airport in 2014.
Associated Press contributed to this report
A suspected drug turf war between rival British gangs broke out on the Spanish holiday island of Ibiza yesterday.
Three British men were taken to local hospitals with gunshot wounds, according to police in the resort town of Sant Antoni de Portmany. Two were treated for flesh wounds and then arrested, while the third was still in intensive care last night after surgery to his chest.
Police believe the shootings were part of a battle between gangs of dealers looking to increase their share of the drug market on the party island. An estimated half a million Britons visit Ibiza every year.
The Straight Story told the true and picaresque tale of Alvin Straight, a septuagenarian widower who sets out from Iowa, driving a lawn mower, on a 380-mile trip to Wisconsin to see his estranged brother, who has suffered a stroke. The film extolled slowness and age, ideas which were almost seditious in a country which worships youth, speed and the automobile.
Farnsworth, with his weathered face, scraggy beard, and his blue eyes alert if watery, perfectly portrayed the dignity, individuality and stubbornness of the man. He was Lynch's first choice for the role, but he was scheduled to have hip replacement surgery, and was using a cane when the casting call came. When he heard that the character used two canes, he delayed the surgery and took the part. He was diagnosed several years ago with cancer, which had left him partially paralysed, and he struggled with the pain while working on the film.
"He was very ill in that movie, but, phenomenally, he made it through. He didn't want the world to know he was sick," said Jewely Van Valin, who had shared his life for the last 11 years. She was in the next room of their New Mexico ranch when she heard the gun shot with which he killed himself.
Farnsworth, a third-generation Californian, spent almost 30 years working as a movie stuntman. He left school at 15 during the Depression, and worked as a stable boy at a polo barn, where many actors played in their leisure time. In 1937, two men from MGM came looking for horses, and for someone who could ride them, for The Marx Brothers' movie, A Day At The Races. Farnsworth followed this with work as a Mongolian horseman in The Adventures Of Marco Polo (1938), and stunted for years for leading Western stars, including Joel McCrea, Gary Cooper and Henry Fonda.
Farnsworth was also a good swordsman, which earned him the job of playing Kirk Douglas's double in Spartacus (1960), even though he remarked that, with his skinny legs, he looked more like "a crane in a short skirt". He then started to get bit parts, mainly in Westerns, as stage coach drivers or cowboys, but his real breakthrough came in Alan Pakula's Comes A Horseman (1978), in which he played Jane Fonda's old ranch hand Dodger, a part for which he was Oscar-nominated as best supporting actor. The character, representing the Old West, is thrown from his horse because of the sound of blasting for oil. He is brought back home, but climbs back on his horse, preferring to die outside under the stars.
Farnsworth also played a Wyoming rancher in Tom Horn (1980) with Steve McQueen, but his first leading role was in The Grey Fox (1982), the story of Bill Miner, stagecoach robber, who emerges from 33 years in prison into the 20th century. According to Roger Ebert: "Farnsworth is one of those unstudied, graceful, absolutely natural actors who has spent a lifetime acting exactly as he feels. I think he is incapable of a false or a dishonest moment. He makes Miner so proud, so vulnerable, such a noble rascal, that the whole movie becomes a little more complex."
Farnsworth represented both the Old West and the Old Hollywood. Of The Straight Story, he said: "There wasn't one four-letter word in this movie. I'll tell you I'm really disappointed in what people seem to want nowadays - action, sex, violence, four-letter words. I've turned down quite a bit of work because there's too many four-letter words." His more folksy roles (including TV series such as Bonanza and The Big Valley) didn't allow him to be much more than a loveable old coot, until Lynch made his offer.
Farnsworth, whose wife of 38 years died in 1985, is survived by their daughter Missy, and son Diamond - who is also a top stuntman.
Some differences of opinion are permissible in conservative media. Not everyone agrees about wars, foreign powers, terror, or drugs. Some are not fans of the current president. Some even risk unconventional ¡°pro-choice¡± opinions.
But the second amendment ? virtually unrestricted access to guns ? is sacrosanct. Across the spectrum of rightwing opinion, from libertarians to the Christian right, pretty much everyone agrees that Americans¡¯ unique access to firearms should continue. We can put this down to any number of things, from the country¡¯s history of frontier settler violence to the influence of the NRA. But there it is.
When a massacre happens, rightwing pundits have work to do: they need to convince any waverers that easy access to semi-automatic weapons has nothing to do with mass-casualty shootings. They also need Republican legislators to remain aware that any moves to restrict access to guns will ruin their career.
Accordingly, rightwing pundits have evolved a series of standard responses to mass murder. Today we¡¯ll look at five of them, all of which have been in evidence this week.
Conspiracy theory is now an ingrained response to mass shootings. If it was once a marginal pursuit, the ¡°alt-right¡± surge and the election of a president who is himself an inveterate conspiracy theorist mean that these beliefs have a large audience and a new quasi-legitimacy.
As you would expect from highly influential radio show host Alex Jones, his website and radio show are canvassing the full gamut of conspiracy theories about the event. So far, Jones and his reporters have put forth a number of theories: that the shooter was targeting conservatives; that he was connected to Islamic extremism; that he was in league with anti-fascists.
Just as he did with Sandy Hook, Jones is amplifying any explanation that comes to hand except the most obvious one: that a white man with access to powerful weapons opened up on a crowd of innocent people.
As the Guardian reported on Wednesday, there is now a cottage industry of YouTube-based conspiracy entrepreneurs whose theories about Las Vegas are at least as lurid as Jones¡¯s. But conspiracy theory also comes in a ¡°lite¡± version, which can be passed off later as ¡°just asking questions¡±. The new Fox News recruit Tomi Lahren tweeted that ¡°something just doesn¡¯t add up¡± about the shooter. Later she added: ¡°Media focusing on guns. There¡¯s something bigger here.¡±
As long as we¡¯re focused on wild theories about who really pulled off the murders, we¡¯re not talking about gun control.
Fussing over definitions and technical aspects of semi-automatic weapons is a good way to avoid questions about why civilians have them.
Conservative pundits have feasted on Hillary Clinton¡¯s awkward tweet about the dangers of silencers. On Fox & Friends, Laura Ingraham said a silencer would melt an AR-15¡¯s barrel, and said Clinton¡¯s unfamiliarity with this fact was ¡°despicable¡±.
Rich Lowry of National Review sniffed: ¡°If Hillary cares so much about the issue, she might take 10 minutes to learn something about it, but gun-controllers tend to be low-information advocates.¡±
But the derision went beyond Clinton. Lowry¡¯s former employee Stephen L Miller ? not to be confused with the White House aide ? turned in a characteristically snide column for Fox News, lambasting ¡°elitists in media who refuse to understand even a basic grasp or terminology about a sacred constitutional right¡±.
Breitbart offered a defense of ¡°bump stock¡± devices ? which effectively convert semi-automatic weapons into machine guns ? disguised as an explainer. One of the ¡°key facts¡± they offered was that banning them would be a ¡°typical leftist war on the poor¡±.
At the Daily Wire, Aaron Bandler did similar service on behalf of the mass shooter¡¯s weapon of choice, the AR-15.
All of this gunsplaining sidesteps the real source of public outrage about mass shootings, which neither embodies nor requires any special technical knowledge: people are regularly killed in large numbers because there are very few restrictions on the circulation of powerful firearms.
Some pundits calculate that the best form of defence is all-out attack. If events put trusty arguments in question, they figure, you can just reassert them at a higher volume.
In the first paragraph of Conrad Black¡¯s latest ramble for National Review, he offers a potted version of what rightwing pundits say after every massacre: gun control won¡¯t work, it¡¯s politically impossible, and anyway it¡¯s a local matter.
On Newsbusters, Michelle Malkin opted for the familiar tactic of arguing that since no single gun control measure will completely end massacres, none should be tried at all.
A Rush Limbaugh rant on Wednesday depended on familiar, uncontested statistics about declines in overall murder rates. (These figures always seem to go missing when conservatives want to whip up fear about law and order). Naturally, Rush said nothing about the increasing frequency, and lethality, of mass shootings.
And at libertarian site Reason, Jacob Sullum got to the emotional core of this form of rightwing bargaining with reality in the title of his article, ¡®A massacre is not an argument¡¯.
This is a tactic often deployed by the higher-toned rightwing commentators, where it is solemnly explained that the left¡¯s hopeless confinement to coastal enclaves means they don¡¯t really know what¡¯s at stake in real America. Any criticism of guns thereby becomes an attack on the communities where guns are owned.
A past master of this tactic is National Review¡¯s David French. On Wednesday, he made the argument that, despite the NRA¡¯s organizing and funding opposition to gun control, gun laws remain as they are because of the heartland¡¯s adherence to American values.
If all else fails, rightwing commentators can simply try to derail the entire conversation in the hope that eventually the news cycle will move on.
One way to do this is to focus on missteps from the left. This offers endless possibilities. WND and other outlets have picked up on the fact that a tiny newspaper published an off-colour cartoon on the massacre. Others have focused their outrage on celebrity activism from reliable punching bags like Michael Moore or Jimmy Kimmel.
Another is to try to spread the blame around to groups who have no relationship to the events. The right has a whole roster of scapegoats available for this purpose.
Frank Gaffney made a characteristic move on Breitbart radio by trying to turn the discussion to Islam, even though there are no indications that the shooter had any connection to the faith at all, let alone Jihadi terror groups.
On Godfather Politics, after describing the shooter as a ¡°crazed Democrat¡±, Keely Sharp turned on ¡°Rino¡± (Republican in Name Only) Paul Ryan, who appears to have given up on deregulating silencers. Focusing ire on the ¡°establishment¡± is a surefire way of avoiding the matter at hand.
The overall goal is to defer any move on restricting the ownership and use of firearms until the moment where it is is even a remote political possibility has passed. At National Review, Kevin Williamson summed it all up in a headline: ¡°It¡¯s time to do nothing about guns.¡±
Police in San Diego have arrested a second man suspected in the shooting of two officers, one of whom died.
He was detained about 1pm on Friday in the Shelltown neighborhood near a house that police had besieged since early morning, hours after the fatal shooting.
A Swat team found the house to be empty, prompting speculation the man had slipped out during the apparent standoff.
Police arrested the first suspect, who suffered gunshot wounds, shortly after midnight in a ravine near the street where the two officers were shot on Thursday night. Neither suspect has been named.
Chief Shelley Zimmerman named the slain officer as Jonathan DeGuzman, 43, and the injured officer as Wade Irwin, 32. He was expected to survive.
In an emotional news conference the chief said the duo, part of a gang suppression unit, were making a stop ? it was unclear if it was a pedestrian or vehicle stop ? and requested ¡°emergency cover¡±.
Colleagues who responded found both with gunshot wounds to their upper bodies. Both were rushed to separate hospitals in police vehicles.
DeGuzman suffered multiple bullet wounds and died despite ¡°heroic efforts¡± by police and doctors to save him, Zimmerman said. ¡°Last night, he lost his life trying to make a positive difference and protect our community.¡±
DeGuzman was a decorated 16-year veteran who survived a stabbing in 2003, which earned him a Purple Heart. He was married with two children. Officials broke news of his ¡°senseless murder¡± to relatives before the press conference, said Zimmerman. ¡°There¡¯s nothing that prepares you to do that.¡±
Irwin underwent surgery for at least one gunshot wound and faced a ¡°long haul¡± to recover, said the chief. He has a wife and a 19-month-old child.
The incident happened about 11pm in the low-income Southcrest area. Police who responded to the backup call tracked one suspect to a ravine. He was shot while being taken into custody and was being treated in hospital, the chief said. She said he was a Hispanic male adult.
Police backed by at least one helicopter tracked the second suspect to a house in Shelltown neighborhood, close to where the officers where shot.
Reporters at the standoff said police lobbed gas grenades and called the suspect¡¯s name on a bullhorn to try to flush him out, only to later enter and find the house empty.
DeGuzman¡¯s killing came as the US¡¯s 12,000 police departments were on high alert following targeted attacks against officers in Baton Rouge and Dallas earlier this month. Tensions have persisted across the country as recordings of police shooting unarmed victims have sparked nationwide protests.
Donald Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, responded by reiterating his pledge to be the ¡°law and order¡± candidate.
Holding back tears, Zimmerman said: ¡°This is gut-wrenching. We have seen this too many times happen throughout this great country.¡± She called both officers heroic, saying they protected San Diego day and night. ¡°Our gang suppression team officers put their lives on the line every day to make sure that our citizens are safe in San Diego.¡±
Mayor Kevin Faulconer of San Diego also offered his condolences to the police department.
¡°Violence against the men and women who wear the badge is violence against us all,¡± he said in a statement. ¡°We need them and they need us.¡±
Statistics released form the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund found that from January to July of this year, 33 officers have been killed in gun-related incidents, a 73% rise from the same period in 2015.
However, police fatalities have been steadily declining for decades. Last year¡¯s number of gun-related police deaths marked a 30% decrease from 2014.
Tamalyn Davis, 17, from Brighton, and Jermaine Davis, 21, were discovered with gunshot wounds to the head 18 miles south of the capital Kingston.
The couple had arrived in Jamaica to visit Jamaican-born Jermaine's family less than two weeks before they were killed.
The bodies were bound together, their hands and feet tied with masking tape and their mouths covered. The badly decomposed bodies were discovered by a farmer on Tuesday who noticed a "foul odour" coming from bushes on his land - but they were not formally identified until yesterday. No motive has been established.
According to local police, it appeared they were killed elsewhere before the bodies were dumped.
The couple were last seen alive on November 28 getting into a taxi in the western Jamaican town of Falmouth, near to where Jermaine Davis's family lived.
Davis told his relatives that he and his wife were visiting friends in Kingston for a couple of days. He had spent the past year living in England where he met Tamalyn. She had lived with her father in Stevenage before moving to Brighton where she set up home with her husband.
A local police spokesman said: "His [Jermaine's] relatives came into the police station to report them missing on Wednesday after they heard on the radio that a young white woman and black man had been found shot dead near Spanish town."
Police said that although no motive had been established it was unlikely that robbery or abduction were the reasons behind the murders. The state in which the bodies were found - with two gunshot wounds to the head and hands and feet bound - is often associated in Jamaica with execution-style shootings by drug dealers.
A Foreign Office spokesman confirmed that the woman was a British national who had been living in the Brighton area and that the other victim was her spouse. He said: "Our sympathies go out to the families of the victims."
A Sussex police spokeswoman said that the force had been contacted by Interpol about the deaths and were contacting relatives. A spokesman for Hertfordshire police said: "We can confirm that a local family has been involved in a tragic double death.
"The murdered couple were away on an extended holiday and the victims' families are being looked after by family liaison officers."
Scotland Yard detectives will be sent to Jamaica next week to help the government fight Kingston's crime wave, providing technical support to a joint military and police force set up to combat gangs.
More than 950 people have been murdered on the island this year in violent incidents that police say is mostly drug-related.
Man Haron Monis took 18 people who had been going about their ordinary business hostage inside the Lindt cafe two and a half years ago. The inquest opened six weeks later. Public hearings were held from 25 May to 5 June 2015, 17 August 2015 to 4 September 2015, and 21 March to 17 August 2016. 118 witnesses gave evidence, including 15 experts.
Today, with the publication of his 500-page report, the NSW state coroner Michael Barnes finalised his recommendations and findings resulting from the 18-month-long proceedings. He praised the bravery of those who responded to the ¡°horrendous events¡±, and extended his condolences to the families of Katrina Dawson and Tori Johnson.
He also accepted the view of an international expert that the siege ¡°would have challenged any police force in the world¡±.
If any aspects of the force¡¯s best efforts were not quite good enough, this report attempts to identify how and why. However, it will not and should not be used to blame particular officers for outcomes beyond their control ... When critiquing the police response, it is important to remember that right from the outset, 18 lives were imperilled.¡±
That said, Barnes identified deficiencies in the response, among them:
But, Barnes found, Monis ¡°undertook the siege in a controlled, planned and methodical manner¡±. Whether or not he had any direct contact with Islamic State, the siege was a terrorist incident.
¡°I cannot stress too heavily that the deaths and injuries that occurred as a result of the siege were not the fault of police. All the blame for those rests on Man Monis. ¡°He created the intensely dangerous situation. He maliciously executed Tori Johnson. He barricaded himself in a corner of the cafe, and his actions forced police to enter the cafe in circumstances where the risk of hostages being wounded or killed was very high. ¡°Monis deserves to be the sole focus of our denunciation and condemnation.¡±
With that, we conclude our coverage of the inquest into the Sydney siege. Thank you for following today and over the past 18 months.
In his first television interview since being released, Peter Moore, the British hostage kidnapped in Iraq, revealed today that he endured mock executions during his 31 months in captivity.
Moore, 36, a computer consultant from Lincoln, was seized with four bodyguards from a government building in Baghdad in 2007. He was released last month and arrived home on New Year's Day.
Describing the first year of his captivity as "very harsh", he told Channel 4 News: "We were in chains, shackled, blindfolded, handcuffed, periodically beaten, water poured over us."
Recounting a mock execution, he said: "One time the guards came in, handcuffed me behind my back, blindfolded me, walked me out, put a pistol to my head and pulled the trigger, and fired another one off behind my back.
"I thought I was dead. Then I realised, actually, I can still hear laughing, I'm still handcuffed and that wasn't the case."
He said he got through the ordeal by imagining he was "walking the dog or riding his motorcycle". "I also used to count dots on the wall and work out mathematical formulas," he said.
Moore paid tribute to the other four men seized, saying he was "very grateful" for their help and the medical treatment they gave him after his abduction. "Certainly without their help and advice, I definitely wouldn't be stood here today."
Jason Creswell, Jason Swindlehurst and Alec Maclachlan were shot dead and their bodies returned to Britain last year. Alan McMenemy, the fourth bodyguard, is also believed dead.
Moore called for McMenemy's body to be returned. During the interview, he was shown visiting the vigil maintained for the men at Lincoln Cathedral. He lit a candle for each fellow hostages.
Moore said that, in 2008, he was ¡©sep¡©arated from the other men and, in 2009, his conditions were "pretty good" as he was let out of chains and given a PlayStation,satellite TV, laptop computer and en-suite bathroom. A Guardian investigation reported that the hostages were taken to Iran within a day of their kidnapping in an operation led and masterminded by the Quds Force, a part of Iran's revolutionary guard.
But Moore said he believed he was held in Baghdad and Basra and moved from house to house every three months. Iraqi intelligence sources told the Guardian the British captives were never made aware that they had crossed the border.
The Foreign Office has continued to insist there was no evidence that Moore was held in Iran, despite claims by Iraqi intelligence that they told their British counterparts and the Foreign Office that the hostages were taken across the border. General David Petraeus, head of US central command, has said Moore was "certainly" held in Iran for at least some of his time in captivity, although he told Reuters it was "difficult to say" what role the revolutionary guards played.
A source close to the kidnappers told the Guardian that part of the deal for the men's release was that "no country could be accused of kidnapping them". Iran has denied involvement.
In a video released in 2008, Moore said: "All I want is to leave this place. I tell Gordon Brown the matter is simple: release their prisoners so we can go."
Moore was installing asset tracing software at Iraq's finance ministry when he was seized. He said his captors made him appear in more than a dozen "proof of life videos" but only one was made public.
His release was on the same day as the transfer of Qais al-Khazali, the head of an Iranian-backed Shia group which claimed responsibility for the kidnapping.
A representative of Asaib Ahl al-Haq or the League of the Righteous, al-Khazali's group, and an Iraqi member of the negotiating team that helped secure Moore's release, said he had not been released until the group had confirmation that its leader had been transferred.
The Foreign Office has denied suggestions of a deal, insisting Britain does not broker agreements with kidnappers.But some of the families of the hostages have been highly critical of the British government's conduct.
Dennis McMenemy, the father of Alan ? whose body has still not been returned ? accused the Foreign Office of "deceit, lies and cover-up" over the kidnappers' links to Iran, while Moore's natural mother, Avril Sweeney, said the government had "never told the truth".
An expert witness for Oscar Pistorius's defence was accused of "irresponsibility" on Wednesday after admitting that he is not trained in ballistics, light, sound or blood spatter evidence and was not present at Reeva Steenkamp's postmortem.
Roger Dixon, a geologist and university lecturer who worked at a police forensic laboratory in Pretoria for 18 years, came under sustained attack from prosecutor Gerrie Nel over his credentials and the manner of his investigation.
Pistorius watched from the dock, burying his head in his hands and retching at one stage, as Dixon described the impact of the bullets he fired on Valentine's Day last year, including one that struck Steenkamp's arm "like an instant amputation". The Paralympic sprinter denies murder, claiming that he fired by accident because he feared an intruder.
Earlier in the trial Pistorius's defence counsel had raised allegations of police bungling and botched evidence, but now it was the turn of the prosecution to tear into the 27-year-old's team of experts. Dixon was subjected to the same withering cross-examination from Nel, known as "the pitbull", that Pistorius himself endured for five torrid days in the witness box.
He presented a different order of the shots that killed 29-year-old Steenkamp and said she was probably hit in the hip and the arm in quick succession by the first two shots while standing close to the door, and may have had her right arm extended to the door handle, as if she were about to open it.
Dixon also claimed that a bruise on Steenkamp's right buttock was caused by her falling back on a magazine rack, contradicting the finding of state pathologist Gert Saayman.
Confronted with a section of the post-mortem report, Dixon exclaimed: "What!" When he went on to begin a sentence with the words, "In my layman's understanding ... " Nel pounced and said: "You see, Mr Dixon, now you call yourself a layman."
The witness admitted that he had not attended the postmortem, a fact of which Nel frequently reminded him. Dixon said he had only been present at three postmortems during his career. Saayman has performed between 10,000 and 15,000.
Nel pressed: "You are not a wound ballistics expert?"
Later Nel asked: "Are you a blood spatter expert?"
Dixon replied: "I have received no training in blood spatter analysis."
The geologist testified that Pistorius's bedroom would have been almost completely dark on the evening of the shooting, supporting the accused's claim that he did not see whether Steenkamp was still in bed when he got up. But asked what expert skills he had used to establish this, Dixon said: "The instruments I used there were my eyes."
The court also heard about sound tests that the defence conducted to show that a cricket bat smashing against the toilet door could be mistaken for gunshots ? crucial to challenging neighbours' claims of what they heard on the night of the killing.
Dixon said he had hit an identical door with a bat to recreate the noises.
Nel, his voice rising impatiently, challenged him: "Are you a sound expert, sir? Have you received training in decibels and sound?"
Dixon replied: "I would hope I'm a sound expert ¡¦ The expertise used was attempting to reconstruct the situation ¡¦ I was not listening to myself making that sound."
He conceded that the test had to be done a second time because of problems with the first test when the pistol jammed, and they were recorded by a music producer with no known experience in recording gunshots.
Dixon said fibres he had seen on the door probably came from the sock Pistorius wore over his prosthetic leg when he tried to kick down the door after shooting through it.
But again he was forced to admit: "There is no course I've ever been on that has trained me to do a physical match."
He also said he had not taken close-up photos of the door until he saw it in the courtroom last month with a "nice light" and "decent camera". Losing patience, Nel described Dixon as evasive and put it to him: "It is the height of irresponsibility to make inferences in areas where you're not expert. Am I right?"
The trial will continue on Thursday and will then be adjourned until 5 May.
A 10-year-old boy died after being shot in the head near the pool of a well-known Puerto Rico hotel, sparking concerns about a rise in killings in the US territory.
The shootout late Monday at the Hotel Caribe Hilton scattered tourists and local residents gathered there to celebrate the Fourth of July. The hotel is located next to an 18th century fort as well as an expanding commercial area featuring high-end restaurants and boutiques.
Ferdinand Perez, a former Puerto Rico legislator, told reporters he was at the hotel with his family when the boy was shot. He said people began to run toward the elevators and hide under stairs.
Injured in the shooting was the boy¡¯s father and another man whom police say had a criminal record and may have been targeted. No one has been arrested, and police are reviewing hotel video surveillance tapes to determine who may have been involved, police agent Israel Arroyo said by telephone.
¡°We are terribly saddened by this tragic news,¡± the hotel said in a statement, adding that the safety of guests is a top priority and that officials are reviewing security protocols.
Hotel spokeswoman Betty Gonzalez did not return messages for additional comment.
Perez said he would support legislation calling for metal detectors being placed at hotels during big events.
Monday¡¯s killing is one of 333 reported in Puerto Rico so far this year, an increase of 54 killings compared with the same period last year.
Prior to the boy¡¯s death, police had already reported 11 killings and 12 shooting-related injuries over the Fourth of July weekend, prompting police chief Jose Caldero to announce he was assigning more resources to cities including the capital, San Juan.
The increase in killings in recent months follows a drop on an island of 3.5 million people that reported a record 1,164 murders in 2011. Officials have previously said they believe more than 70% of killings are drug-related.
The shows were intimate and intense, 43 songs, and a range of covers from Bowie to Bob Marley. Prince, all alone on stage at a purple grand piano, started with Little Red Corvette and ended his second set of the night with a Purple Rain medley.
But as soon as the sets were done, Prince was off. No after-party. No jam. He went directly to the airport to board a jet home ? the same jet that would make an emergency landing two hours later with Prince apparently overdosed on an opiate painkiller and requiring a lifesaving safe shot of Narcan.
Within a week, he would be dead ? from an overdose, investigators seem to believe, of the painkiller it now appears he had been taking for years to combat crippling arthritic hip pain, a condition he would not correct owing to strong religious-based resistance to medical intervention.
But in Atlanta, on the night of Thursday 14 April, there was little to suggest to the concert¡¯s promoter, Lucy Lawler-Freas, that the star¡¯s life was already in danger.
¡°He wasn¡¯t feeling well when he arrived,¡± she recalled. ¡°But you wouldn¡¯t have known. He just said he wasn¡¯t feeling 100%. He did a brief soundcheck. You wouldn¡¯t have known he was sick ? the shows were phenomenal. He gave it his all. But we knew he wasn¡¯t feeling well because he normally does an after-party. He did not. He was there an hour before he¡¯s due on stage and left immediately after. He wanted to go straight to his plane and go home.¡±
The show was a sign of Prince¡¯s astonishing confidence as an artist. Lawler-Freas, a promoter at Rival Entertainment in Atlanta, had received an email at the end of March: could she book the musician to do two shows at the city¡¯s 4,600-capacity Fox Theater a week hence?
It would just be Prince, in purple pyjamas, a purple baby grand piano, a candelabra and a vast graphic backdrop of the artist himself.
This was to be the first stop in a new leg of his Piano & A Microphone tour. It was characteristic of his pop-up concept of touring, one that the 57-year-old star had honed in the UK in 2014 where he and his all-female rock group 3RDEYEGIRL had played a series of dates, some in tiny venues, at little notice.
¡°They contacted me by email, I was sorta shocked,¡± Lawler-Freas said. As soon as she responded, ¡°They called me immediately. We got the show confirmed, and it sold out as soon as tickets went on sale. Prince wanted to work very quickly. Pick a date, book it, do the show. We did that for Atlanta and then we did it for other markets ? St Louis, Nashville and Washington DC ? but we had not announced them.¡±
For the Atlanta shows, Prince would travel light. He was accompanied by just two bodyguards. There was no special riders to the contract; nothing that spoke of an eccentric or demanding star. But late afternoon on show day ? 7 April ? Lawler-Freas received a message from Prince¡¯s tour manager; the singer had come down with flu. A doctor would confirm the diagnosis. He wasn¡¯t getting on the plane from Minneapolis. They were postponing the show.
The audience, already at the venue, showed no anger. ¡°It was very unusual for Prince cancel, so many of the audience were supportive,¡± the promoter recalled. ¡°They were sending messages saying, ¡®Get well, Prince. We want you at 100%.¡¯¡±
But this was the first sign that something was amiss with the great musical genius of the 80s. Was it flu, or was it flu used as a euphemism by junkies and opiate pill-poppers for symptoms of withdrawal? To a doctor it might look more or less the same ? fever, running nose, stomach cramps.
That Sunday, Lawler-Freas gave Prince¡¯s tour manager some options. Prince chose the following Thursday, 14 April. The rescheduled gigs were announced the following day but when the day came around, the promoter received new reports of illness.
The shows went ahead, but then came the journey home. Around 1am, just over an hour into the flight, the control tower in Illinois received an urgent request for landing. A passenger on board the Dassault Falcon 990 was unresponsive. Only 48 minutes away from its destination in Minneapolis, the flight was abruptly diverted.
¡°Jet 3990, we did call the Quad City airport, hoping they¡¯ll have someone standing by for you,¡± an air traffic controller told the pilot. ¡°Was it a male or female passenger?¡±
The plane rapidly descended 45,000 feet in 17 minutes, and upon landing at 1.18am, a bodyguard carried an unconscious Prince down from the plane, according to medical and emergency response records released this week by the city of Moline, Illinois.
The mostly redacted records offered few details of the chaotic scene, but soon after, emergency responders gave Prince a safe shot ? an injection of Narcan ? that would block the opiates and send him straight into withdrawal. It¡¯s one of the few facts to immediately emerge from the last days of Prince Rogers Nelson¡¯s extraordinarily productive and unusual life.
Within 20 minutes, he was taken to a nearby hospital for treatment, but the medical visit was brief: flight records show the private jet left for Minneapolis again only 10 hours after landing in Moline.
It is possible the painkillers he was taking were a temporary measure for some ailment. However, it has been reported that the devout Jehovah¡¯s Witness who publicly eschewed alcohol and profanity, had a longer-term issue with prescription drugs ? his longtime collaborator Sheila E said he had hip and knee problems from years of jumping around the stage wearing high heels.
But in the following days, there was no sign from the Prince camp that anything was seriously amiss. They called the promoter at Rival Entertainment. He¡¯d decided to take a week off.
¡°They said: ¡®Let¡¯s find other dates to do those extra shows because we want to take a small break. Then we¡¯ll start reconfirming in the next several days,¡¯¡± Lawler-Freas said. ¡°They gave me the indication that he needed to rest.¡±
Prince wrote to his fans that all was well, writing simply on Twitter: ¡°I am #transformed.¡± Hours later, Prince representatives said he had been fighting the flu for several weeks. By Friday evening, he was home at his Paisley Park compound in Chanhassen, Minnesota, located about 20 miles outside Minneapolis.
Over the next several days, Prince would pick up his life in the city. He visited a local record shop, Electric Fetus, in support of Record Store Day.
¡°He was dressed really nice,¡± Bob Fuchs, the store¡¯s manager, said last week. ¡°I wouldn¡¯t have guessed anything was wrong.¡± Prince shopped for about 15 minutes, picking up a half-dozen CDs, from Joni Mitchell to Stevie Wonder.
That afternoon, Prince was also seen riding a bicycle around a suburban strip mall near Paisley Park. Outside a hair salon, nearby resident Julie Reid snapped a quick photo.
After posting the photo on Facebook, Reid said her friends responded: ¡®Wait isn¡¯t he sick?¡¯ ¡°Well,¡± she said. ¡°Clearly he was feeling better,¡±
Better enough to host a dance party at Paisley Park that evening. The Paisley dance parties had a reputation for Prince making brief appearances, sometimes performing intimate shows in front of only 30 people. But the 300-or-so attendees at the Saturday 16 April party didn¡¯t expect Prince to come out, given the reports of illness.
¡°It was pretty surprising, pretty crazy, because he had just been hospitalized a day prior,¡± said Cory Amundson, 29, a photographer who attended, his inaugural visit to Paisley.
Across two rooms, partygoers danced away until just after midnight, when the music stopped. Amundson heard a voice from the main dance room: it was Prince. ¡°We just heard his voice, talking, saying it had been a crazy couple days, but he¡¯s here ¡¦ He¡¯s fine,¡± Amundson said.
Prince said he had a couple beloved items he wanted to show off and directed them back to the other room. Amundson and his friend, Gretchen, found themselves at the front of the stage, about five feet away from Prince.
¡°It¡¯s not like I have seen Prince in person every day,¡± Amundson said. ¡°But for the most part, he seemed healthy, he seemed happy ¡¦ He was just kind of his normal, quiet self.¡±
Prince sat down and played Chopsticks again, on a new Yamaha-gifted piano, and showed off a purple guitar he recently picked up. Then, about 15 minutes later, the brief appearance ended. He alluded to his recent health issues and told the crowd: ¡°Save your prayers for a couple of days.¡±
Michael Holtz, a DJ at some of Prince¡¯s Paisley parties over the last two years, was there as a spectator. The rumblings in recent days of Prince hiding long-term drug use stunned the 38-year-old. At Paisley, he said, ¡°It¡¯s always been such a clean environment.¡±
¡°Basically, let¡¯s just say I can¡¯t even have meat on the premises because he¡¯s a vegan,¡± he said. No one drinks or smokes, either. ¡°I¡¯ve just never gave that one thought,¡± Holtz said of Prince using drugs.
On Tuesday 18 April, Prince appeared at the Dakota Jazz Club in Minneapolis, to watch the singer Lizz Wright. He dropped by the venue monthly, employees said, taking a table on the second level that would be cordoned off by a curtain.
¡°His presence reflected and underscored the range and depth of his appreciation for other artists,¡± Dakota owner Lowell Pickett said. At the end of the night, he departed as he always did: through the kitchen and out a side door.
But the following day, Wednesday 19 April, Prince¡¯s condition appears to have deteriorated. An unnamed law enforcement official told the Minneapolis CBS outlet that Prince was checked by a doctor at a Twin Cities hospital. Later that evening, he was spotted at a local Walgreens pharmacy near Paisley Park. A local resident was walking in as the music legend was exiting the store.
¡°[She] said: ¡®Wow, that¡¯s Prince,¡± the woman¡¯s husband later relayed to a radio station. The woman didn¡¯t mention whether Prince looked ill, he said. She declined to comment in an email to the Guardian.
An acquaintance dropped Prince off at Paisley Park, the last time he was seen alive, according to law enforcement officials, who haven¡¯t said whether he was alone at the 70,000 sq ft complex throughout the night.
¡°I don¡¯t think it would be unusual for him to be there by himself,¡± said Carver County sheriff Jim Olson, during a press conference last week.
The following morning, Thursday April 21, staffers became concerned when he reportedly missed a holistic medicine appointment. They headed to Paisley to look for Prince and at around 9.43am, three people discovered him in the elevator on the first-level of the compound.
The staffers called 911. ¡°The people are just distraught,¡± an unidentified man told the operator. The individuals, unable to relay they were at Paisley Park, retrieved old mail to find an exact address.
¡°You¡¯re at Paisley, OK, that¡¯s in Chanhassen,¡± the operator said. ¡°Are you with the person who¡¯s ¡¦¡±
First responders arrived and attempted CPR, but to no avail. Olson said his deputies are equipped with Narcan ? the same antidote used to revive the musician a week prior ? but it was not deployed to resuscitate Prince. At 10.07am, Prince was pronounced dead.
Law enforcement officials have not said who placed the 911 call, and a judge on Thursday sealed the search warrant and accompanying documents.
According to a source with knowledge of the investigation, Prince was fully clothed, but his body was already in rigor mortis when officers responded. Opioids ? the prescription drug Percocet ? were discovered at the property, the source said, ¡°and they¡¯re waiting for the toxic[ology] report, but they¡¯re 99% sure it was an accidental overdose¡±.
The source¡¯s description of prescription drugs found at Paisley Park was corroborated by the account of a law enforcement official who has spoken to the Associated Press.
An autopsy was completed of Friday 22 April, but an official cause of death may not be known for weeks. A spokesperson for the Midwest Medical Examiner¡¯s office declined further comment until the toxicology report is released.
The revelation that Prince may have been a long-term drug user didn¡¯t surprise Michael Padden, an attorney who represented the musician¡¯s half-brother and half-sister in litigation previously ? some against Prince himself.
¡°The way it was described to me was that, yes, it was something that was consistent use,¡± Padden said. Prince¡¯s siblings had mentioned his drug use in the course of conversation, unrelated to litigation, suggesting he had used cocaine and Percocet since the 1980s.
¡°It wasn¡¯t just casual,¡± Padden said. ¡°Something I want to make clear: Prince used because it¡¯d make him a better performer; he wasn¡¯t doing it just for kicks.¡±
It was also disclosed this week that Prince died without leaving a will. His sister, Tyka filed probate documents in Carver County district court, as the heir to Prince¡¯s estate, stating: ¡°I do not know the existence of a will.¡± A special administrator was appointed by the court soon afterwards.
On Saturday 23 April, a gathering of Prince¡¯s ¡°most beloved¡± friends and family joined in a small service, after his remains were cremated. The service was ¡°a private, beautiful ceremony to say a loving goodbye¡±, said Prince¡¯s publicist Yvette Noel-Schure, in a statement. At a future date, she added, an announcement will be made for a ¡°musical celebration¡±.
But as investigators continue to piece together what led to Prince¡¯s death, family and friends remain stunned. ¡°I just felt like Prince was just going to live well into his 80s and beyond,¡± said Holtz, the occasional Paisley Park DJ.
His greatness must sit now alongside a miserable, untimely end. But a happier sendoff has surfaced this week too ? a 14-minute audio recording of a segment of the last shows has Prince taking the Atlanta crowd on a fond trip through his musical evolution, from hesitant kid learning to play Chopsticks to a creature of clubland as he unfolded a shimmering intro to Joy in Repetition. Prince thanks them for coming out and apologises for cancelling one week earlier: ¡°I was a little under the weather,¡± he says, ¡°but we¡¯re here now.¡±
It¡¯s Monday, generally the busiest day for any ER, but at Henry Ford hospital in Detroit, it¡¯s biblical. Patients lie in beds lined up along soft hallways with harsh light, and the doctors have what they call a ¡°campfire¡± going, a ring of moaning patients huddled in beds around a central dispatch area. An alarm sounds, and Dr Gerard Martin has two minutes to prepare. He doesn¡¯t yet know what tragedy will arrive by ambulance into the resuscitation bay, but he knows it¡¯s a matter of life or death.The doctor and the patient arrive at the resus (short for resuscitation) room at the same time: Martin in a white lab coat with a rapid energy devoid of panic, and the patient naked and unresponsive. One of two resuscitation bays where the most severe cases are taken, the room is all stainless steel and focused dynamism. Fourteen medical professionals swirl the room, unwrapping plastic packages and holding needles while paramedics perform CPR. Two nurses ready a yellow and black machine that looks like a drill press with an oversized button where the chuck would be.
¡°We call that the thumper,¡± Martin winks before guiding a resident who is threading a needle into the flesh near the patient¡¯s collarbone. ¡°The thumper¡± is an automated CPR machine, manufactured in Michigan. A tech attaches it around the man¡¯s body. The piston compresses his chest with a pneumatic sound and a click, like one of the stamping machines in Detroit¡¯s long-gone factories.
The patient¡¯s belly fat roils, his ribs break. Five minutes. Another resident squirts blood into a pan. Ten minutes. The patient¡¯s son is escorted from the room. Twenty minutes. The ambulance asks for its stretcher back.
Detroit is one of America¡¯s most violent and impoverished cities, and Martin has spent nearly 30 years on the spear-tip of the health crisis in a violent and ill country.
From crack (not as big a problem now as in the 1980s) to gunshot wounds (fairly steady, worse when it¡¯s hot) to heroin (currently at epidemic proportions), the challenges have varied. But Martin and the staff at Detroit¡¯s last not-for-profit hospital have tackled them all. When other civic institutions were leaving Detroit, along with prosperity and civic order, Henry Ford hospital stayed to care for the sick.
Even in what may be the most desperate city in the US, if you have a heart attack, medicine has reached a level of sophistication where no fewer than 14 people will work to keep you alive if you reach the hospital, regardless of your ability to pay. As healthcare in the US continues to change, namely in the battle over government run and administered insurance, it makes sense to take a look at one of America¡¯s most august and storied hospitals and their staff for insight and guidance.
¡°One of the best things about Henry Ford is, if the guy¡¯s homeless, and they¡¯re having the same symptoms as the mayor, they get the same treatment,¡± Martin said one evening, finishing an interrupted thought from the ER. ¡°To the people that do it, it¡¯s not that remarkable. It¡¯s the way it should be done. In my opinion, everyone should have healthcare ? ¡±
Another alarm, another patient, another life in his hands.
Slight and physically unimposing, Martin is an accomplished cyclist as well as a superbly talented doctor. He often rides his bicycle to work from his house in Grosse Pointe, an inner-ring suburb of Detroit. He has also ridden it clear across the country.
¡°I rode from Oregon to New Hampshire,¡± he says at dinner one night, characteristically humble about his accomplishments. It took him only 50 days.
Formerly the head of the ER department and now semi-retired, Martin has the particular characteristic of bowing his head and smiling sheepishly when someone praises his long list of accomplishments. He commands a staff of hundreds at the apex of a hierarchy resembling the military, yet when speaking with patients he says things like ¡°belly¡± rather than ¡°stomach¡±, and ¡°sick¡± instead of ¡°injured¡±.
As he speaks, he guides hospital beds through doors with the relaxed demeanor that comes after 30 years removing bullets, suturing knife wounds and watching people live or die on his watch. His countenance on the whole suggests a retired and beloved elementary school principal more than a man who has been up to the forearms inside a chest cavity due to axe wounds.
¡°He has thousands of lives to his name,¡± I hear as I make my way through the corridors of the dignified red-brick hospital.
In the triage bay, Martin explains the workings of a sonography machine, while a woman in ripped jeans and an orange T-shirt yells at a rubber-gloved nurse. Each bed is separated by a curtain, but the woman in orange has ripped hers open. She entered the ER complaining of chest pains and is drunk. The patient¡¯s shouts become insults and the nurse moves to restrain her.
¡°Fuck you, you fucking faggot,¡± the woman screams at man. ¡°I know my rights.¡±
A scrum of police officers, EMTs and technicians move to help the struggling nurse, but the woman¡¯s cries and insults only become louder and more full of pain, her struggles more ferocious. Martin stops his demonstration and steps into the middle of the crowd, waving everyone¡¯s hands off the woman.
In less time than it takes to hand-wash a coffee cup, and with mysterious grace, Martin has defused the situation. As he checks the woman¡¯s heart with a stethoscope, he explains exactly what is about to happen to her ? the nurses will hook her up to an EKG machine, among other procedures ? and gets the woman to lie down, still muttering at the original nurse but pliable.
Martin seems unfazed and almost joyous through the ordeal. He leads with quiet slyness, kindness and confidence ? and 30 years of experience practicing those traits. ¡°When I was young, I thought: ¡®I¡¯m going to go to medical school, I¡¯m going to become a doctor, and I¡¯ll make enough money so that I can live in the woods in Vermont on a farm and I¡¯m going to work two days a week,¡¯¡± he said one evening. ¡°I never in a million years pictured myself in the inner city, of any city, working in the situation I do.¡±
Henry Ford hospital has 877 beds, with 77 of them in the emergency room. Its intensive care unit holds more patients than any other in Michigan, and its emergency department is the third-busiest based on volume. More than 100,000 people visit the ER at Henry Ford every year.
The ER itself is split into four categories, numbered one through four, with category one holding the most acute patients. Martin is on this rotation today: a man who took too many seizure meds and is in a coma; a ¡°heavy user¡± who shows up to ERs across the city multiple days a week because he is lonely or mentally ill; a woman who has been in an auto accident and is wearing a neck brace.
Martin touches each in turn, with ungloved hands. The physical proximity in the ER isn¡¯t exactly cramped, but it is close.
¡°Ah, some residents always use gloves, but I don¡¯t really mind,¡± he says matter-of-factly when washing his hands between patients. Next, he attends a woman with acute diabetes.
¡°Oh, your hands are cold,¡± winces the woman.
She laughs, and Martin asks the woman about the nurse taking her blood.
¡°She was great! She got [the needle] in on the first try!¡±
According to the hospital, statistically at least one of these patients is on Medicaid, the healthcare program run by both federal and state governments for low-income Americans. Of Henry Ford¡¯s patients, 18% are on Medicaid or a Medicaid HMO, and another 43% are on Medicare, the federal program for seniors.
One of the cornerstones of the Republicans¡¯ new American Health Care Act is a plan to begin rolling back the increased support that the Affordable Care Act gave states for Medicare expansion, starting in 2020.
¡°I¡¯m a big supporter of the Affordable Care Act for its principles and policies,¡± Wright Lassiter III, the president and CEO of Henry Ford Health System, tells me in his office. It¡¯s less gaudy than I would have expected for the head of a $6bn organization, possibly owing to the hospital¡¯s not-for-profit nature. But it¡¯s still spacious and stately.
¡°I think our principle problem in society, with healthcare, is that as a society we haven¡¯t decided yet, like every other industrialized country, that every citizen should have healthcare and that makes our society better.¡±
¡°Now, how you pay for it or who provides it ? is it a tax credit or a block grant, or is it a government subsidy, or whatever ? we can debate that on political lines or on economic development lines or on social justice lines or on a number of fronts. But our fundamental problem is we¡¯re still debating what most countries believe is a truism, which is: everyone should have healthcare insurance.¡±
The Affordable Care Act (ACA), colloquially known as Obamacare, cut the number of uninsured people in America by about two-fifths. It increased the number of insured individuals by approximately 20 million, with 30 or so million left uninsured. In Michigan alone, more than 630,000 became insured through the law¡¯s Medicare expansion and another 345,000 or so via the healthcare exchanges. It¡¯s about one in every 10 people in Michigan.
What is less clear is what effect that has had on the overall health of the state¡¯s population and the health of its urban hospitals. Nearly everyone interviewed for this story agreed that the ACA hadn¡¯t had time to ¡°reach equilibrium¡±, as Manu Malhotra, associate chief medical officer, put it while sitting next to Martin in the ER.
Predicted drastic spikes in ER visits haven¡¯t come to pass, but neither have drastically increased revenues for hospitals such as Henry Ford. The equation has now simply changed in complex ways, and hasn¡¯t had time to bear economic or medical fruit ? or fail to do so. There simply hasn¡¯t been enough time to tell.
¡°Society at large, and people with the ability to pay, currently already shoulder the burden of providing the cost of healthcare coverage to the people who are unable to afford it ? and do that in the most expensive and inefficient way possible by providing care only in emergency situations,¡± Malhotra said. ¡°Finding a better way to do that is essential, and the Affordable Care Act is the only cohesive effort that we¡¯ve seen on the national level.¡±
On a Wednesday, Malhotra and Martin are deciding whether to remove the bullets from a man who has been shot multiple times. Contrary to televisual opinion, bullets are generally left inside the body unless they actively present a danger to the patient or interfere with future medical procedures.
They decide one bullet will need to be removed, so a screening can be performed, while the others will stay. All the residents are out taking tests this day, so Martin will perform the procedure himself.
¡°Get the metal pan!¡± Martin jokes, aping the Hollywood convention of a gruff doctor dropping each slug into a brass surgical tray with a solid ¡°plink¡±.
Martin pantomimes the motion, holing up his fingers dramatically, and Malhotra chimes in with a ¡°ding!¡± when the phantom bullet falls. Everyone laughs.
¡°We have 50 of those pans in the back,¡± he says to me, clearly kidding, but the joke belies the typical gallows humor used as a coping method of those ? cops, firefighters, soldiers ? who work with death daily.
¡°The children are the most difficult,¡± Martin tells me later, shaking his head. ¡°I like joking around, but when someone¡¯s sick it¡¯s no time for joking. You need to buckle down and know what to do and take care of the patient. Put the patient first.¡±
A woman sits with her elderly mother, who wears a breathing mask. She has a degenerative nervous system disease and will one day stop breathing, her mind fully alert, because her brain can no longer tell her diaphragm to contract.
The same day, another family, in the corner and speaking a foreign language, huddles around a matriarch quite literally kept alive by machines. Although this person they love cannot communicate with them, they cannot in turn let her go.
A scared teenager has a dislocated shoulder. A hilarious elder gentleman tells anyone within earshot his historic life story as he lies in bed with chest pains. A professional woman is terrified by a mysterious rash. Martin inspects them all with the care of a good dad scrutinizing scrapes and bruises on a calming child.
The national healthcare battle seems to be waged largely with swords of political ideology and money rather than bodies and souls, and the man lying with bullets lodged inside his frame can seem an afterthought. They say a single death is a tragedy and a million is a statistic. Some of those statistics, the faces and the names and the bodies behind the giant numbers thrown around by politicians, are sitting in the ER today.
¡°I can feel the bullet in the skin right here,¡± Martin tells the gunshot victim. (As with every other patient in this story, US law protects the privacy of medical information and thus prohibits providing identifying details of patients or their situations.) ¡°I¡¯m going clean it off, numb it up and pull the bullet out.¡±
As he cleans the wound on the man¡¯s upper arm, a circular bruise about the size of a basketball with a small slit in the center, the aural landscape in the ER is lush. Beeps and blips and alarms and dozens of voices are overpowered only by the heart monitor tracking the man¡¯s pulse, a steady ding, ding, ding.
The procedure takes about two minutes. The blips from the heart monitor become faster as the doctor places a needle loaded with numbing drugs inside the man¡¯s forearm ? DING DING DING ? and faster still when the doctor expertly digs around in his body for the bullet ?DINGDINGDINGDINGDINGDING.
Martin drops the bullet in a plastic pan with a hollow thud. The bullet appears to be .45 caliber, with bits of flesh and blood attached, jagged and mushroomed from the impact. If not for the rifling inscribed on the body, it might look like a moon rock or a miniature bonsai tree. Almost all bullets, regardless of provenance, go to the police.
¡°Can they reuse it?¡± Martin jokes, as he whisks on to the next person.
The man in bed is apparently relieved the procedure is over, the hands of the doctor having preformed their work perfectly. His heart rate has slowed back to a steady, plodding rhythm.
The American Health Care Act keeps certain popular provisions of the ACA, such as guaranteed coverage for those with pre-existing conditions and allowing children to stay on their parents¡¯ plans until they¡¯re 26 years old.
It does away with others, including the ¡°individual mandate¡±, or forced enrollment, and many of the taxes levied on the wealthy to pay for the program. Starting in 2020, the bill proposes to reduce the planned Medicaid expansion and, over time, in effect eliminate it.
Roundly criticized from nearly every corner of the political spectrum, the bill will undoubtedly go though many revisions, and the House speaker, Paul Ryan, has promised that this is only the first step in a Republican overhaul of healthcare. What does seem clear is that the bill will do little to further reduce the number of Americans without health insurance ? approximately 30 million ? and will probably reduce the number currently insured.
The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office has put the number at 24 million fewer people insured by 2026. And although the figure is notoriously difficult to predict with scientific rigor, as creating control groups in giant healthcare studies of this nature would be unethical, two Harvard Medical School professors put the number of deaths directly due to an ACA repeal at 43,000 people each year.
As the Republican healthcare bill and, more generally, healthcare in the US is debated, the broader question outside of the minutiae of individual bills and policies is: how, as a society, do we define success in healthcare reform?
Is it measured by how many individuals receive healthcare? Or how comprehensive the coverage is? Is it how much money is saved on the national level, or how many people no longer have to declare bankruptcy because of medical bills?
Is it about the patient with the blonde braids lying before Martin on the operating table? She has been dropped off by a good Samaritan who found her unresponsive and lying in a gutter. Rushed into the recess room by nurses, the patient is nearly catatonic and slipping further into herself, barely able to answer questions, finally drifting completely out. One of the residents lifts her hands and they stay as they were placed, stiff, like when a dog lies on its back. Doctors yell to her. Nothing.
A resident loads clear fluid into a needle and injects it into the woman.
The woman snaps out of bed and opens her eyes, absurdly conscious and alive, wonderfully lucid. She¡¯s just received a dose of Narcan, a drug to reverse heroin overdoses. The result is stunning and immediate, as if she¡¯s arisen from the dead.
Abu Nidal's group carried out hijackings, attacks on synagogues, kidnappings and assassinations of diplomats. His targets included the US, Israel, Britain, France, Jordan and many other countries, as well as followers of the Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat. About 900 were killed, including eight Britons.
Members of his group, the Fatah-Revolutionary Council, better known as the Abu Nidal Organisation, said yesterday that he had committed suicide because he was suffering from cancer.
A senior Palestinian official in Ramallah, on the West Bank, described the circumstances as "mysterious". The official said he had been told he had committed suicide but was unable to explain how this was consistent with a report that he had suffered three gunshot wounds.
His death has been expected since news emerged in 1998 that he had been admitted to a clinic in Cairo.
Abu Nidal is a nom de guerre for Sabri al-Banna and which means Father of the Struggle. The US state department once termed his group "the most dangerous terrorist organisation in existence".
He was a terrorist mercenary, who worked, at various times, on behalf of Iraq, Syria and Libya and, it is claimed, even Israel.
A Foreign Office source said yesterday: "We are unable to confirm his death but there is no reason to doubt the reports. The impact of his death on the Abu Nidal Organisation remains to be seen but its activities have been in abeyance in recent years. We hope that, if true, his death will see the end of the organisation."
He added: "This organisation was responsible for the deaths of innocent Britons, including two diplomats. The attacks were ferocious and indiscriminate."
In France, victims said they felt cheated by his death. Francoise Rudetzky, a spokeswoman for SOS Attentat, a group that represents victims of terrorism, said many were "angry, very disappointed" that Abu Nidal had escaped justice for so long. Ms Rudetzy said: "He benefited from the protection of several countries for 20 years, and he was never arrested and judged."
Abu Nidal is believed to have died last Friday. The first report of his death came yesterday morning in one of the more reliable Palestinian papers, Al-Ayyam. Israel Radio almost immediately broadcast the news, and later there was independent confirmation from senior Palestinian sources.
Abu Nidal's brother, Mohammed al-Banna, a fruit and vegetable merchant who lives in Nablus, in the West Bank, said he heard about his death only from the media. "I haven't talked to him for a long time, 40 years or so. I spoke to friends and relatives in Arab countries to check this out. They didn't know he was in Baghdad," he told Qatari satellite television station al-Jazeera.
Yossi Melman, an Israeli author, who wrote a biography of Abu Nidal, said his death could be the result of illness but he could also have been assassinated, perhaps by one of his own men in the internal feuds for which his organisation is known or perhaps by an Iraqi government fearful that he knew too much about its operations.
But his presence in Baghdad was not considered an embarrassment to the Iraqi government at a time when it is facing a threatened US invasion.
The US administration, though desperately seeking to link the Iraqi president, Saddam Hussein, to terrorism, has at no time made an issue of Abu Nidal's presence in the Iraqi capital. This may be, in part, because Abu Nidal's group is no longer operational.
He moved to Baghdad about 18 months ago after he feared that the Egyptian government would arrest him in hospital and hand him over to western countries.
An Iraqi affairs specialist based in Beirut, Khairallah Khairallah, said Abu Nidal's relations with the Iraqi government were strained. The Iraqi government fell out with him in 1991 during the Gulf War when he sided with with Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
Mr Khairallah said he maintained a symbolic presence in Baghdad, with a small office and one bodyguard. He was wanted by the US, Britain, France and other countries. He was also sought by Jordan and other Arab countries: about 50% of his targets were Arab, including Palestinians. He was tried in absentia in Jordan last year for the assassination of a Jordanian diplomat and found guilty along with four colleagues.
Abu Nidal was born in a prosperous family in Jaffa, in what was then Palestine. After the creation of Israel in 1948 and the failure of the Arab invasion, he became a refugee, eventually joining Arafat's militant Fatah movement.
He broke with Arafat in 1974 because he opposed a switch in tactics from international targets to confining attacks to exclusively Israeli ones. He assassinated some of the most moderate of the Palestinian leadership, those seeking a settlement with Israel, and was sentenced to death by a Fatah court in absentia.
His ruthlessness also applied to his organisation. Fearing a coup was being mounted against him, he ordered the deaths of those he believed responsible. They were said to have been buried under earth, kept alive with a pipe through which air and water was supplied: when the order came through to kill them, a bullet was fired down the pipe.
At the height of his activities, Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North, who conducted counter-terrorist operations for the national security council under President Reagan, dubbed him the US public enemy number one, a position he held until his group stopped operations in about 1992 and President Bill Clinton switched the title to Osama bin Laden.
His organisation attempted to assassinate Israel's ambassador to London, Shlomo Argov in 1982, the reason Israel cited for its disastrous invasion of Lebanon. His most notorious attacks were twin assaults on the Israeli airline El Al's ticket counters at Rome and Vienna airports on December 27 1985. Eighteen people were killed and 120 wounded.
The attacks
 The Abu Nidal Organisation is wanted for more than 90 attacks in 20 countries from 1974-92, resulting in 900 deaths. Abu Nidal has been tried and sentenced in absentia in various countries for many of these killings, which include:
¡¤ Attempted assassination in London of Israeli envoy Shlomo Argov, the reason cited by Israel for invasion of Lebanon
¡¤ Killed six in attack on a Parisian restaurant popular with French Jews
¡¤ Kidnapped British journalist Alec Collett, who was working for UN in Beirut. Collett was found dead on a gallows
¡¤ Bombed the office of British Airways in Madrid, killing a woman
¡¤ Egypt Air flight from Athens to Cairo hijacked and forced to land in Malta. Six killed before commandos stormed plane, 58 died in the raid
¡¤ Eighteen killed in attacks on airline counters in Rome and Vienna airports
¡¤ Five Britons among seven people killed in attack on a hotel in Khartoum
¡¤ Abu Nidal orders the deaths of 165 members of his group
Six days after Terence Crutcher was fatally shot by a Tulsa police officer, and despite the release of video and audio, key details remain disputed. Did the 40-year-old have his hands up at the moment Betty Shelby opened fire? Was he reaching towards the inside of his SUV, and was the window open or shut? Were police influenced by his race? Was he behaving erratically, as if on drugs ? and even if that was the case, could it provide any sort of justification for killing him?
What cannot be challenged, based on clear video evidence from a squad car¡¯s dashcam of the encounter last Friday evening, is that after Crutcher had been shot once in the chest, tased by another officer and sank to the ground, lying still and bleeding profusely, the officers near him did not immediately provide medical assistance. In fact, they backed away tentatively in tandem, weapons still drawn, as more colleagues arrived.
It is not until almost two minutes later that an officer approaches Crutcher ? to examine his clothes, evidently to check if he is armed. Finally, about 30 seconds later, an effort is made to administer first aid.
In addition to anger at the death of an unarmed man whose interaction with police began merely because his car appeared to have broken down in the middle of the road, some activists are outraged at what they argue was a lack of urgency as Crutcher lay on the ground.
They accused police of callous indifference towards his fate. ¡°They just sat there and let him bleed out. That is disregard for humanity, in itself,¡± said Marq Lewis, a local community organiser.
Ryan Kiesel, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Oklahoma, said the police¡¯s actions were ¡°reprehensible and indefensible¡± and compounded the tragedy. ¡°They dehumanised him even further in death by allowing him to bleed out, failing to render any sort of immediate aid and even casually milling about the scene. There is on the video no sense of urgency among any of the police officers about trying to save this man¡¯s life,¡± he said.
Shelby has basic training as an emergency medical responder, but her attorney said that her colleagues told her not to help the man she had just shot. ¡°I know Officer Shelby, after she was taken to the back of her car, you can see that on the video, said ¡®please let me get my EMT bag and let me go work on this man¡¯. The officers there thought it best that in her state of mind that she not go back up there, but I do know Officer Shelby wanted to,¡± Scott Wood said.
Amid the ongoing nationwide focus on fatal encounters between police and African American people, departments around the country have drawn criticism for not rendering aid promptly in high-profile incidents captured on video.
Last year, following the failure of officers in Cleveland to help Tamir Rice, a 12-year-old boy they fatally shot in 2014, the city agreed to changes in its use of force policy that include a requirement to provide emergency first aid.
It was several minutes after he was shot inside a car in July before police in Minnesota began administering first aid to Philando Castile. He died in hospital about 20 minutes after sustaining multiple gunshot wounds.
As with many aspects of police training, medical standards and expectations vary widely across the country. Boston, for example, has a detailed policy requiring officers to give first aid while waiting for an ambulance.
When Houston police fatally shot Alva Braziel in a street last July, body camera footage shows officers were more focused on ensuring the scene was safe and talking with witnesses than on attempting life-saving measures.
An officer leans over Braziel¡¯s body and pries what appears to be a gun from his right hand, as another stands nearby, weapon drawn ? but the footage does not indicate that anyone tried to administer first aid. An officer is heard saying an ambulance has been called; it arrives about six minutes after the shooting.
A Houston police spokesman declined to discuss the incident because it is still under internal investigation. Generally, he said: ¡°We do not have medical training at HPD, we leave that up to the fire department and the paramedics ¡¦ Some officers are trained and have use of tourniquets but not all 5,200.¡±
¡°Best practice is that after the shooting occurs and as soon as the officers are assured that they are safe, and that the scene is stable, the officers need to shift from being in enforcement mode to being life-savers and trying to provide what may be life-saving medical assistance,¡± said Jim Bueermann, a former police chief in California who is president of the Police Foundation, a national police thinktank based in Washington. ¡°But it¡¯s this matter of making sure the scene is stable. Using Tulsa as the example, they had to first make sure that there was no one else in the vehicle.
¡°Someone who is wounded by the police can still be capable of shooting them. There are examples where police have shot and wounded a guy and he was able to shoot them. A gun concealed in a waistband; or there are examples of someone being arrested and put in a police car and they missed that he had a gun in his pocket and then he shoots them,¡± he said.
¡°But there is a huge problem ? this is a huge issue, it¡¯s the number one issue, this issue of the police use of force and shooting people of colour and how it affects community trust and confidence in the police. On a national level, this is THE issue.¡±
The Tulsa officers cannot be accused of failing to follow the department¡¯s medical protocols ? because there aren¡¯t any. ¡°We do not currently have a policy regarding rendering medical aid,¡± said Jeanne MacKenzie, a spokeswoman.
She said Oklahoma state standards require eight hours of CPR and basic first aid training, which the Tulsa force supplements with another eight hours of ¡°tactical medical training¡±, which focuses on ¡°providing a student with training more specific to battlefield trauma. So we focus more on stopping heavy bleeds, clearing blocked airways and treating penetrating chest injuries.¡±
A decision by the local district attorney on whether Shelby will face criminal charges is not expected before next week.
Peaceful protests and vigils have been held each day since police made the footage public on Monday. On Wednesday evening, a standing-room-only crowd of hundreds crammed into a Baptist church north of downtown for a service one speaker billed as the chance to give expression to ¡°righteous rage¡±.
Many attendees wrote laments on pieces of paper pinned to wires that ran along the walls of the hallway at the main entrance. Some quoted the Bible, some expressed sorrow and others conveyed anxiety. One note said: ¡°I live in fear that my nephews may be next¡±.
The 70-year-old mother of the late Rev Martin Luther King, the civil rights leader who was assassinated six years ago, was herself shot and killed today as she played the organ for morning service in the Ebenezer Baptist Church in the centre of Atlanta, Georgia.
Her assailant, a young black man, who eye-witnesses said "went berserk," and who was later reported to have said that "all Christians" were his enemies, was held by members of the church choir after he had wounded two other members of the congregation, one of them fatally.
Aware of the potential consequences of this latest tragedy, the Mayor of Atlanta, Mr Maynard Jackson, issued a statement beseeching the community to remain calm.
Mr Jackson, elected last year as the first black mayor of a major southern city, had returned abruptly to Atlanta from a West Coast conference last Wednesday after ominous civil disturbances had erupted in the streets following the police shooting of a young black man who had violated his parole. The mood in the city had been calming after the tense and uneasy week when this morning's tragic shootings took place.
Atlanta said later that a 21-year-old black man, Marcus Wayne Chenault, of Dayton, Ohio, had been charged with two counts of murder, one of assault, and one of carrying a concealed weapon.
According to witnesses Mrs Alberta King, whose husband, the Rev Martin Luther King Snr, is pastor of the church on Auburn Avenue, was playing the organ for the Lord's Prayer near the start of the service when the attack began. A young black man jumped and screamed: "You must stop this! I am tired of all this! I'm taking over this morning."
With that he drew two pistols and for the next 90 seconds fired wildly and continuously, hitting Mrs King, another elderly woman parishioner, and a 69-year-old church deacon, Mr Edward Boykin.
'Delirious'
While members of the congregation dived beneath the pews, a few men from the choir jumped on the gunman, who was shouting: " I¡¯m going to kill everyone in here - they did it to me in the war."
Mrs King's grandson Derek, who said he helped to subdue the gunman as he tried to reload a pistol, added: "He was delirious. He appeared to be in a fever. He said over and over, 'The war did this to me. It's the war.'"
Mrs King was taken to the nearby Grady Memorial Hospital, where officials said she was "barely alive" on arrival. She died shortly afterwards from a gunshot wound to the right of her head. Mr Boykin was pronounced dead on arrival.
The attack on Mrs King took place less than 100 yards from where her famous son, killed in 1968 at the age of 39, is buried.
This is an edited extract. Full article:
Fox News has apparently fallen victim to hacking, with its politics Twitter feed repeatedly announcing President Barack Obama had been shot dead.
@foxnewspolitics began tweeting the information to its 33,000 followers at about 2am local time, with the posts rapidly being shared around the internet.
The rogue tweets appeared to begin after the account sent a message saying Fox had just "regained full access to our Twitter account".
The following tweets all related to the supposed death of Obama, with some posts being very specific about the president's injuries.
"@BarackObama has just passed. The President is dead. A sad 4th of July, indeed. President Barack Obama is dead," came the first tweet. The string of messages continued:
"@BarackObama has just passed. Nearly 45 minutes ago, he was shot twice in the lower pelvic area and in the neck; shooter unknown. Bled out", and then: "@BarackObama shot twice at a Ross' restaurant in Iowa while campaigning. RIP Obama, best regards to the Obama family."
Whatever the hoaxer's identity, they do not appear to have been entirely web-savvy. The first three posts revealing the president's death were directed to the @BarackObama Twitter feed, meaning only those following both accounts would have seen the messages.
The unknown tweeter appeared to realise the error of their ways, switching tack to post three more tweets that would have been seen by all followers:
"#ObamaDead, it's a sad 4th of July. RT to support the late president's family, and RIP. The shooter will be found;
"BREAKING NEWS: President @BarackObama assassinated, 2 gunshot wounds have proved too much. It's a sad 4th for #america. #obamadead RIP;
"We wish @joebiden the best of luck as our new President of the United States. In such a time of madness, there's light at the end of tunnel."
Fox News was not immediately available for comment.
Surveillance footage shows Sedat Meric turning his gun on police officers from the National Crime Agency. Meric approaches the West Green Pool Bar in Haringey, north London, and shoots three times into the venue. The NCA officers identify themselves and Meric fires in their direction until he runs out of ammunition and gives himself in. Meric, 25, from Tottenham, and Oktay Ayanoglu, 22, from East Finchley, were convicted for possessing a firearm with intent to endanger life
The US is reeling from another school shooting, the 45th this year, after a 26-year-old gunman murdered as many as nine people and wounded seven more at a community college in Oregon before he was killed.
The gunman was named as Chris Harper Mercer, a 26-year-old man who lived near Umpqua college in the rural town of Roseburg. He is thought to have been born in England before moving to the US as a young boy.
Investigators were focusing on reports from survivors that Mercer told students to state their religion before he opened fire.
The police were also looking at reports that hours before the attack he posted messages on an internet chat site warning people to stay away from school. Investigators said they were attempting to trace people on the site who discouraged him while others urged him on. It does not appear anyone reported the messages to the authorities before the shooting.
CNN reported that four guns were recovered at the scene of the killings. Initial reports said 20 people were wounded alongside those who died although this number was later revised downwards.
It was not immediately known how many students were on campus at the time. The community college, which mostly provides adult education to students in their late 20s, has about 3,000 registered students but only a few hundred attend full-time.
The gunman¡¯s father, Ian Mercer, said he was ¡°just as shocked as everybody¡± at his son¡¯s actions. Speaking from his home in the US, he told reporters: ¡°I¡¯ve just been talking to the police and the FBI and all the details I have right now is what you guys [reporters] have already.
¡°I can¡¯t answer any questions right now, I don¡¯t want to answer any questions right now. It¡¯s been a devastating day, devastating for me and my family. Shocked is all I can say.¡±
Hours after the killings, President Obama clearly agitated at making his 15th statement on shootings since taking office, said: ¡°There¡¯s been another mass shooting in America¡± and spoke of the country being numbed by the repeated massacres.
¡°As I said just a few months ago and I said a few months before that and each time we see one of these mass shootings, our thoughts and prayers are not enough. It does nothing to prevent this carnage being inflicted some place in America, next week or a couple of months from now,¡± the president said. ¡°Somehow this has become routine.¡±
Since Obama¡¯s reelection in November 2012 there have been 993 mass shooting events in the United States, not including Umpqua. Almost 300 of them have occurred in 2o15.
Kortney Moore, 18, told the News Review in Roseburg she was in her writing class when a bullet came through a window and hit her teacher in the head. She said Mercer then ordered students to stand and state their religion before opening fire. Moore said she was left lying on the floor with people who were shot.
Other survivors spoke of not hearing a shot as he moved from room to room through the campus of 16 buildings with the classrooms in a horseshoe next to the Umpqua river. Marilyn Kittelman¡¯s son was in the building next to the science block where the initial shooting occurred.
¡°He said there was no sound. There were some 30 shots and no sound. He was pretty surprised,¡± she told CNN.
Mercer was cornered in a hall by a police officer who reported exchanging shots with the man. ¡°Suspect is down,¡± he told the 911 dispatcher. ¡°He¡¯s not breathing, is in Snyder hall.¡±
A couple minutes later, the officer told the dispatcher: ¡°We¡¯ve got multiple gunshot wounds. We¡¯re going to need multiple ambulances on scene.¡±
Mercer had been living at an apartment complex in nearby Winchester. Yellow police tape surrounded the building on Thursday night.
A neighbour, Bronte Hart, said Mercer lived upstairs and would ¡°sit by himself in the dark in the balcony with this little light¡±. She said a woman she believed to be Mercer¡¯s mother also lived upstairs.
It was not clear whether Mercer had been a student at Umpqua college although a listing from a Noel Coward play that had been staged there had his name posted as an assistant with the production.
His stepsister, Carmen Nesnick, told CBS Los Angeles that he travelled to the US as a young boy. Other accounts report that Nesnick specified that Mercer was born in England.
At the Douglas County fairgrounds, families waited along with grief counsellors and a large international media contingent for students, who were being bused from the campus.
Heather Alvers, a UCC student, was waiting to give survivors free trips home. She was on her way to campus when police stopped her. Most of her friends were confirmed safe but, she said, ¡°the community is devastated¡±.
Alvers said that rumours and confusion had taken the place of facts for most of the day, and ¡°some people were still locked down on campus¡±. She had been here for hours, while ¡°hundreds and hundreds¡± of evacuees came through. Like everyone else, all she could do was wait.
Oregon¡¯s governor, Kate Brown, spoke of her ¡°profound dismay and heartbreak¡± at the killings. Douglas County commissioner Chris Boice learned of the shooting when one of his staffers ¡°got a phone call from her daughter who was on campus, and the shooting was happening at that point¡±.
¡°I ran down the hall called the sheriff on his cellphone. He was en route to the incident,¡± said Boice. ¡°We¡¯re a tight-knit community and everybody knows everybody. We¡¯re going to be heavily impacted by this and I can¡¯t imagine what those families must be feeling right now.¡±
Obama blamed the failure to pass gun control measures after earlier mass killings for having to make yet another address to the nation after yet another tragedy. He expressed frustration that countries such as Britain and Australia have been able to pass legislation that largely prevents such tragedies.
¡°Right now I can imagine the press releases being cranked out. We need more guns, they¡¯ll say. Fewer safety laws. Does anybody really believe that?¡±
The president called for news organisations to compare the number of Americans killed by terrorism over the past decade with the number who died in gun violence. He noted that the US spends trillions of dollars and has passed myriad laws to protect people from terrorism.
¡°Yet we have a Congress that explicitly blocks us from even collecting data on how to reduce potential gun deaths. How can that be?¡± he said.
Obama appealed to voters to elect politicians committed to strengthening gun control and to gun owners to ask themselves whether organisations such as the National Rifle Association, which pour large amounts of money into lobbying against restrictions, are really serving the interests of those who use weapons for sport and hunting.
The kind of opposition the president faces comes from county sheriff John Hanlin, who was at the scene of the killings and spoke movingly of the impact it would have on families he is close to. But in 2013 he wrote to the vice-president, Joe Biden, saying he would not enforce ¡°unconstitutional¡± laws to restrict ownership.
¡°Gun control is NOT the answer to preventing heinous crimes like school shootings. And actions against, or in disregard for our US Constitution and 2nd Amendment rights by the current administration would be irresponsible and an indisputable insult to the American people,¡± he wrote.
Guns can be carried openly in Oregon. The police in Portland sometimes get calls from alarmed citizens who spot a person with a semiautomatic weapon walking through the city only to be informed that is legal. The state issues permits to carry concealed weapons as a matter of routine but, unlike many states, requires a mental health check.
Gun laws were tightened earlier this year by requiring background checks on private gun sales to bring them in line with weapons sold through gun shops.
¡°We have an obligation to protect Oregonians from gun violence,¡± Brown said before signing the legislation. ¡°If we want to keep our kids, schools and communities safe, we must make it harder for dangerous people to get guns.¡±
There were immediate calls for strengthened gun control, including from the Democratic presidential candidate, Hillary Clinton.
Everytown for Gun Safety, a group funded by the billionaire former mayor of New York, Michael Bloomberg, noted that the Umpqua college killings were the 45th school shooting this year in the US, and the 142nd school shooting since the attack at Sandy Hook elementary school, in Connecticut, nearly three years ago.
¡°America is the only developed country where when someone asks if you heard about that campus shooting, you have to clarify: ¡®Which one?¡¯ That is unacceptable,¡± said Colin Goddard, a survivor of the 2007 Virginia Tech shooting and an Everytown advocate. ¡°Something has to change. We need to all come together for the Umpqua families today.¡±
Danielle Beccan, 14, was hit by a single bullet in the abdomen in October last year. She died from her injuries in the operating theatre of the Queen's Medical Centre a few hours later.
Junior Andrews, 23, and Mark Kelly, 20, both from The Meadows district of Nottingham, deny murder. Birmingham crown court heard that as Mr Kelly's gold Citroen Xsara car drove off, a black gloved hand made a W sign at the passenger window - meaning the Waterfront gang. The prosecution claim Mr Andrews made the gesture. He is allegedly a gang member and has WFG [Waterfront Gang] tattooed on his arm and NG2 on his neck - the postcode of the Meadows' area.
Peter Joyce, for the prosecution, told the jury that Danielle had been walking home with friends who were "broadly minding their own business" and not causing trouble. She had been on her way to sleep over at a friend's house.
Mr Joyce said: "She had been shot and she had been shot from a motor car which Mr Kelly was driving and Mr Andrews was a front seat passenger. There had been a number of shots fired from that car as it drove past this group of children and young people."
Soon after, Danielle's mother, Paula Platt, who lived around the corner, was summoned by her daughter's friends. "Danielle was alive, Danielle was conscious and Danielle spoke to her mother saying: 'I am going to die,'" Mr Joyce said. "Her mother said: 'You are not going to die.'
"These two young men live in an area of Nottingham called The Meadows. There is a hatred - it doesn't matter how pathetic and absurd - between The Meadows and St Ann's. As the car went away, a sign from a gloved hand was made at the passenger window of a W. The W stands for the Waterfront gang, of which Mr Andrews is a member." He described it as a "victory salute - it is the Waterfront gang that did this." He said whoever fired the shot, they were in it together. "Danielle was in the wrong place at the wrong time going back after a night out," he added.
The jury were shown a photograph of Mr Andrews, wearing a black glove, making the W gesture.
Mr Joyce said that earlier in the evening, the defendants had been out burgling. A stolen DVD player and DVDs were found in the boot and a stolen watch was discovered in the glove box of the car.
After the shooting, Mr Kelly had his braided corn-row hair shaved off and he fled to Birmingham and then London; Mr Andrews went to Aberdeen. Mr Kelly arrived at his aunt's in London with his younger brother's passport and a substantial amount of cash.
Mr Kelly told his aunt that his car had been used in a shooting but he had lent it to someone else "for a few minutes" and was not involved, but knew the name of the person who had been. Mr Andrews went to his mother's house in Aberdeen with a girlfriend. "He told her he had a few problems and his phone had been found in a car involved in a murder." The prosecution says the defendants made frantic attempts to contact each other in the aftermath of the shooting.
Gun residue found in the car matched that from two shell casings found at the murder scene, the prosecution claims. Both rounds were converted 9mm rounds which were "most likely fired from a self-loading pistol".
Mr Joyce said there were only 150 gold Citroen Xsaras in the UK. Police had excluded "all but one" of them from the area on the night of the murder. "The one not excluded is Mr Kelly's - the one that has gunshot residue in it." The prosecution says it can track the car's route through Nottingham using CCTV.
In a statement read to the court, Paula Platt said she had given her daughter ¡Ì40 to go to the goose fair. One of Danielle friend's had knocked on her front door and told her: "Paula, Danielle's been shot." She found Danielle lying on her back in an alleyway surrounded by young people who were trying to help her. Somebody had put a coat under her head to make her more comfortable. "I knelt down and spoke to her and stroked her hair," she said. "She recognised me straight away and she said to me: 'I am going to die.' I kept telling her: 'You are not going to die.' I saw the wound in her stomach and I said it is just a flesh wound." She said she was horrified to see her daughter in such obvious distress.
A woman living next to the alleyway described hearing "six loud cracks" and seeing Danielle motionless on a nearby grass verge.
The trial, which is expected to last for up to four weeks, continues.
An Albuquerque, New Mexico firefighter who hung up on a frantic 911 caller attempting to save the life of a 17-year-old gunshot victim has resigned, according to media reports.
The firefighter, Matthew Sanchez, was working in the city¡¯s dispatch center when he received a call from a woman who said her friend was ¡°dying¡±. The firefighter hung up after the woman snapped at him, saying: ¡°I¡¯m not going to deal with this, OK?¡±
The shooting happened as about 10 teenagers had gathered at a house in a south-eastern neighborhood of the city, around 10pm on 26 June. Police estimated that suspects shot five times at the house, one of which hit 17-year-old Jaydon Chavez-Silver, a senior at Manzano high school. Chavez-Silver later died from the gunshot.
The woman who called the city¡¯s 911 dispatch center told Sanchez she was administering CPR as she spoke to him, but that Chavez-Silver looked like he was dying.
¡°I¡¯m doing CPR as we speak, I¡¯m keeping him alive!¡± the caller said.
¡°OK, is he not breathing?¡± Sanchez asked.
¡°Barely ... [inaudible] Stay with him! Stay with him, good job. Just stay with me, OK? OK, there you go, good job, Jaydon,¡± the caller said, speaking to the teen.
¡°He¡¯s barely breathing. How many times do I have to fucking tell you?¡±
¡°OK you know what, ma¡¯am? You can deal with it yourself. I¡¯m not going to deal with this, OK?¡± Sanchez said.
¡°No, my friend is dying,¡± the caller said as the phone cuts out.
The firefighter, a 10-year veteran of the department, was apparently first re-assigned to administrative duty, local television station KRQE reported. The firefighter resigned Tuesday night, according to a statement from the city manager.
Police are still investigating Chavez-Silver¡¯s case, KRQE reported. At the time of the shooting, police said they believed the teen, a wrestler and football player at his high school, was at ¡°the wrong place at the wrong time¡±. A $4,000 reward fund has been setup for anyone with information leading to the arrest of those involved.
Hip-hop star Wyclef Jean has received a gunshot wound to the hand while campaigning for a fellow performer who is running for president in Haiti.
The shooting happened in the Delmas area near the capital of Port-au-Prince on Saturday night, said Joe Mignon, senior programme director for Jean's Yele Foundation. Jean was treated at a hospital and later released, Mignon said.
Jean, a native of Haiti who rocketed to fame as a member of the hip-hop trio the Fugees, is in his home country to support fellow musician and friend Michel "Sweet Micky" Martelly, who is contesting a run-off vote taking place on Sunday against former first lady Mirlande Manigat.
Last week, Jean participated in a Martelly campaign concert in Port-au-Prince.
"We are happy that Wyclef is okay but we continue to pray for him and for a peaceful and fair election today in Haiti," said the Rev Al Sharpton, who has worked with Jean on educational issues and bringing aid to Haiti after the devastating January 2010 earthquake.
Rosemond said: "It is clear that enemies of progressive change in Haiti are behind the shooting of Wyclef ? those that don't want to accept that a monumental change is inevitable for the betterment of the Haitian people. This incident will not deter those of us that see the election as crucial to the country's future."
The ¡°good guy with a gun¡±. He¡¯s armed with a concealed-carry permit at home and a loaded pistol at his side. To hear fervent gun rights advocates tell it, he uses his gun to defuse tense, violent situations and keep those around him safe all the time.
It¡¯s a storyline reinforced by groups such as the National Rifle Association, whose vocal leader Wayne LaPierre has perpetuated the mantra: ¡°The only way to stop a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun.¡±
But if there¡¯s an adversary the good guy with a gun isn¡¯t on the lookout for, it¡¯s Mark Bryant. A native of Harlan County, Kentucky, Bryant stands 6ft 1in with long hair and a bushy white beard. He¡¯s an avid shooter, a former NRA member who likes to destress at the local gun range by ¡°killing paper¡±, as he puts it.
Bryant collects handguns. Revolvers, mostly, but the occasional pistol as well, such as the one he used to pass his test to get a concealed-carry permit. He also collects gun violence data. From his home office in Lexington, Kentucky, Bryant has developed what is by some measures the most comprehensive database of recent gun deaths and injuries in America.
More than 13,000 people were shot and killed last year alone, with twice as many injured, according to the Gun Violence Archive, the not-for-profit group Bryant founded. Since 2014, Bryant¡¯s team has recorded more than 100,000 incidents, including those where a gun is used in public and no one is hurt. Instances of ¡°defensive gun use¡± ? ie a good guy with a gun who made a difference ? accounted for less than 3%.
Bryant, 61, has been around guns his entire life. He learned to shoot when he was five years old, and joined the NRA as a Boy Scout so he could access members-only gun ranges. Back then, the NRA was more of a marksmanship and gun safety organization than the political powerhouse it has morphed into today. Recently, Bryant noticed a shift in the politics of gun owners that didn¡¯t seem to take the steady drumbeat of gun violence into account.
¡°They stopped going for a solution, but rather for their side to ¡®win¡¯, with everybody having to absolutely trash the other side to make their point,¡± Bryant said. ¡°That bothers me on a systemic level. Just deep down, that bothers me.¡±
Bryant is a retired computer systems analyst. He first started looking closely at gun deaths while following Slate magazine¡¯s tally in the wake of the 2012 Sandy Hook shooting in Newtown, Connecticut. Doing his own research, he kept finding missing bodies that hadn¡¯t been counted.
¡°I called them up and said, ¡®You¡¯ve got these gaps,¡¯¡± Bryant said. As people continued shooting each other, Bryant realized a basic piece of information was absent from the increasingly contentious gun debate in America: an accurate accounting of the human toll of gun violence as it happened.
Rather than use an automated algorithm to tally the carnage, Bryant developed an old-school system to manually trawl the internet for any mention of a gun or shooting. He scanned media outlets, coroner¡¯s offices and law enforcement press releases online. Each time he found a death that wasn¡¯t included in the map that Slate updated daily, Bryant emailed Chris Kirk, an editor at Slate who oversaw the data collection.
With a small staff and limited resources, Kirk knew he wasn¡¯t capturing as much data as he could. So he started relying on volunteers to report incidents. Almost by default, Bryant began to organize the volunteers, divvying up responsibilities and helping Kirk solve problems. The gun deaths kept adding up.
¡°Eventually, they got tired of me and gave me the keys,¡± Bryant said.
Bryant took over the Slate project in late 2013, when he secured funding from philanthropist and open government advocate Mike Klein. Since then, Bryant and his wife, Sharon, have assembled a small team of research analysts who, with an annual budget of about $500,000, have quietly created a database intended to collect information the government isn¡¯t capturing.
The data is updated daily, and includes common categories of violence, such as mass shootings, child deaths and accidental shootings. The group also tracks incidents in which no one is hurt but a gun was involved, such as a home invasion or a bar fight where someone brandishes a gun.
The numbers form the foundation of research that influences policy decisions and, eventually, Bryant hopes, can change the public perception of guns. Bryant isn¡¯t ¡°for or against¡± gun ownership. He¡¯s simply trying to reduce gun violence by building a better understanding of what guns are to America.
Bryant¡¯s numbers have been cited in presidential debates, local, state and federal policy discussions and in the same media outlets where much of his data are drawn from. The data dispels two common myths about gun violence. First, that it¡¯s strictly an urban, or big city, problem. The second myth, and one that¡¯s made Bryant a target of gun rights advocates arguing that more guns equals less crime, is the notion that a good guy with a gun stopping a bad guy with a gun is a common occurrence.
It¡¯s clear from Bryant¡¯s data that there aren¡¯t anywhere near the 1-2.5m instances of defensive gun use per year that gun rights advocates claim. Those figures, unlike Bryant¡¯s, are based largely on the results of a survey taken more than 20 years ago. Because it¡¯s an estimate, there¡¯s no way to verify the incidents, something advocates attribute to the nature of crime reporting.
¡°The logic that they use that says, ¡®Well most of them just aren¡¯t reported, we just walk away happy that we kicked ass.¡¯ That¡¯s baloney,¡± Bryant said, arguing that if a gun owner used their gun defensively, it doesn¡¯t make sense to not report that to law enforcement and, in turn, create a record that could be picked up by researchers and added to the archive. ¡°That¡¯s very illogical.¡±
Many states have made it easier to carry a gun in public, with statistics linking concealed-carry permit holders, which make up less than 5% of the population, to a decrease in violent crime. And while the percentage of households that own a gun is down, individual gun ownership is at an all-time high.
¡°The price of freedom,¡± Bryant said. ¡°That¡¯s essentially the argument for more guns.¡±
Unlike numerous other efforts to track gun violence that began after shootings like the one at Sandy Hook, Bryant doesn¡¯t rely on crowdsourcing or an automated algorithm.
Instead, researchers comb through more than 1,200 media websites each day, looking for obituaries, crime stories and any mention of a gun. It¡¯s a tedious process, and one meticulously managed by Bryant, who often calls contacts at local law enforcement and coroner¡¯s offices to verify that a gun was involved in a homicide, for example, rather than some other weapon. Still, Bryant will be the first to tell you it¡¯s an imperfect system.
¡°We have two rules at Gun Violence Archive,¡± Bryant said. ¡°One is accuracy; that¡¯s paramount. And the other is discretion.¡±
In some cases, categorizing an incident can be more difficult than confirming it happened. Bryant steers clear of race, an element included by other independent efforts to track aspects of gun violence, such as officer-involved shootings. Bryant also doesn¡¯t want to get caught up in political debates that have nothing to do with guns, such as abortion. If a pregnant woman is shot and killed, for example, she counts as one death in the archive.
¡°To me, a life begins when you get a piece of paper with your name on it,¡± Bryant said.
Although the government keeps tabs on violent crime, it doesn¡¯t track violence for the sake of understanding the role of guns. The FBI tracks violent crime and breaks down incidents by the type of weapon involved, such as knife or gun. But the data are reported by local law enforcement, and widely considered an incomplete assessment of gun violence. The most comprehensive government data on gunshot victims is maintained by the Centers for Disease Control. But collecting the information is expensive and, as a result, not all states report their numbers, making it impossible to get a complete tally.
¡°You need good data,¡± said Garen Wintemute, an ER doctor who has studied the epidemiology of gun violence for decades. ¡°I think the more sources we have the better. The key is, we need to know how good the data are. So people who are collecting data have a responsibility to publish their methodology.¡±
Each of Bryant¡¯s dozen or so employees gets a 40-page manual explaining what to collect and how to categorize it. Archive researchers are assigned geographic areas of the country, which helps them quickly become familiar with the best sources of information. It¡¯s similar to how a beat cop might get to know his or her neighborhood, except this neighborhood exists almost entirely on the internet.
When news reports don¡¯t detail whether a death involved a gun, Bryant and his staff do their own follow-up inquiries to find out. Bryant recalls a gruesome murder-suicide in Florida a couple years ago, when a man killed his wife and son before taking his own life. None of the initial media reports described how the attack happened. So Bryant did his own reporting, only to find out that the man stabbed his wife to death, shot his son with a bow and arrow and hanged himself. Since there was no gun involved, the incident was never added to the archive.
While Bryant¡¯s team continues to find ways to collect more detailed data, he still relies on other entities to disseminate it. The archive¡¯s website is bare bones. Most of the time, when you read about Bryant¡¯s numbers it¡¯s in a news report. That¡¯s because he publishes aggregate subsets of the data online, and takes additional inquiries by request, often with specific parameters in mind.
Bryant¡¯s staff divides data by congressional boundaries, making it easy to isolate incidents in a district. Doing this allows Bryant to tell lawmakers, ¡°This is the gun violence in your area.¡±
¡°When you have someone against any regulation whatsoever, and you give them these incidents in their backyard, it pushes them to either say ¡®I don¡¯t care,¡¯ or to come up with a rational solution to the problem,¡± Bryant said.
In addition to providing geographic context, the archive drills down on individual incidents, with categories for hate crime, domestic violence and bystanders killed, among others.
His goal is to present facts to people who aren¡¯t on either extreme of the gun spectrum.
Bryant sees a growing ideological divide as the biggest hurdle to reducing gun violence.
¡°That bothers me more than anything. That this has become so fractured,¡± he said.
Amanda Gailey, an English professor and founder of Nebraskans Against Gun Violence, which has used Bryant¡¯s data in its research, said Bryant can be an ¡°uneasy fit with our movement in that he actually quite likes a lot of gun people. He¡¯s friends with them, he will defend the culture that values firearms.
¡°It takes a while to realize that he¡¯s exactly the kind of person we need in the gun reform push,¡± Gailey said. ¡°He¡¯s fact-based, fact-driven. He doesn¡¯t go for the easy jibes at gun culture, and he is a bridge between what could be meaningful gun reform and the reality of American culture.¡±
An accompanying podcast version of this story is available at Revealnews.org
MaKayla Dyer wanted to look just like the queen in the movie. A Tiara. A blue dress, sparkling.
She loved Frozen, the way so many other eight-year-old girls love the Disney movie, whether they are sitting in a suburban living room or in a trailer in a rural stretch of the American south-east, as MaKayla was when she watched.
She knew all the words, and spent afternoons playing with her best friend and an Elsa Barbie. This Halloween, she was going to look just like Elsa. Powerful and pretty, both.
This week, MaKayla¡¯s friends and family gathered to stare at the girl¡¯s costume. There she was, Queen Elsa. Surrounded by pink wreaths. Inside a casket.
The eight-year-old girl from White Pine, Tennessee, died on 3 October. Police say a neighbor in her trailer park shot her, in a dispute about puppies. The alleged shooter was 11.
At the funeral, four-year-old Riley Edwards approached the casket. She placed a teddy bear next to her friend¡¯s body and whispered: ¡°Come on Kayla,¡± she said. ¡°Let¡¯s go play.¡±
White Pine is a rural town with a little more than 2,000 residents. There are three gas stations, two stoplights and one grocery store. The staff at McDonald¡¯s call you ¡°honey¡± or ¡°darling¡±. The fire department is all-volunteer and high school football dominates Friday nights.
Most residents find work on factory floors, in stores or behind the wheel of a semi truck. Among the rolling hills and far-spaced, single story homes, the leaves are turning gold.
Three people have been murdered here since 2001. In that time, 12 people have been murdered in all of Jefferson County. This town is safe, residents say. Family friendly. They knew MaKayla as a quiet, polite girl who always said ¡°please¡± and ¡°thank you¡± in her thick southern accent. She smiled almost constantly.
¡°She had the kindest heart of an eight-year-old,¡± said Misty Edwards, Riley¡¯s mother. ¡°And she had a whole life ahead of her.¡±
Chastity Arwood, a neighbor, spoke to Local 8 News. The girl was turning cartwheels with one of her sisters and a friend on the grass outside her home, Arwood said. Her 11-year-old next-door neighbor showed her his puppy from inside his open bedroom window and asked to see hers.
The boy pointed his father¡¯s 12-gauge shotgun to the window.MaKayla giggled and turned to her friends.
¡°Let¡¯s go get the ?¡± she began to say.
That is when, Arwood says, the boy snapped the trigger.
Seconds later, the girl¡¯s family ran to Arwood¡¯s porch. ¡°He shot my baby!¡± they yelled, over and over, above the noise of the Tennessee-Arkansas game on Arwood¡¯s TV. Arwood called 911.
When Misty Edwards heard the pop of the gunshot, she thought someone was burning garbage. Her eight-year-old niece, Hannah, the friend who was with MaKayla, ran inside to tell Edwards the girl was lying on the ground.
¡°Don¡¯t play like that, don¡¯t say things like that,¡± Edwards told Hannah, who started to cry.
When Edwards walked outside, MaKayla¡¯s mother, Latasha Dyer, was on her knees, cradling the child¡¯s body to her chest. MaKayla died in hospital.
Hannah has gone quiet since the incident. Whenever she tries to talk, she begins to cry. Her school gave her the week off.
MaKayla had run into trouble with the boy before, Dyer told a local television channel, WATE. When the family first moved to the mobile home, he made fun of MaKayla, calling her names. Dyer went to the principal of White Pine Elementary, the school both children attended. The bullying stopped.
The 11-year-old boy is being held on a first-degree murder charge at a juvenile facility, in lieu of a $500,000 bond. His next court hearing is scheduled for 28 October, at which point the case could be transferred to an adult court. Child welfare services are investigating, according to the Knoxville Sentinel.
Jefferson County sheriff GW ¡°Bud¡± McCoig said the boy¡¯s parents and his five siblings were home at the time of the alleged shooting. Whether the parents will be charged with their son is ¡°still under investigation¡±, he told the Sentinel.
MaKayla¡¯s death came on the heels of a shooting at a community college in Roseburg, Oregon that killed nine. On Friday, two more campus shootings occurred: one person died in Flagstaff, Arizona and another died in Houston, Texas.
An estimated 10,000 children are killed or injured by gun violence every year in the US, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). The US also has the highest rate of gun-related deaths of any high-income country, the AAP says.
According to the Gun Violence Archive, as of Saturday 10,236 people had died from gun violence in the US this year. But the defence of gun rights, long championed in places like White Pine, is spreading across the country. In a 2014 Pew study, 52% of those surveyed said it was more important to protect the right to own guns than to limit some people¡¯s access to the weapons.
In White Pine, some residents do not see MaKayla¡¯s death as a reason to change their view. It is a tragedy, they say, but it will not alter how they live.
¡°I am 100% pro-gun,¡± said Tammy Cody, the co-owner of a thrift store near the White Pine mobile home park. ¡°But we have safety precautions.
¡°Why would you have a loaded shotgun with that many children in the home? That makes me more nervous than what happened. You¡¯re not protecting your child with the standard rules of owning a gun.¡±
Cody said people in town were wondering where the boy¡¯s parents were during the alleged shooting. They wondered if the boy had been taught gun safety.
Alex Graves, a gas station employee whose daughter went to White Pine Elementary with MaKayla and the boy, also said the focus should be on the boy¡¯s parents, not the guns.
¡°If he got that upset over not getting to pet a puppy,¡± Graves said, ¡°you have to wonder if there¡¯s more factors at home.¡±
When Edwards bought the bear for Riley to place in MaKayla¡¯s casket, the Dollar Store cashier told her it was a pitiful case for everyone involved. Many in town agreed.
¡°I feel for both sides,¡± Cody said. ¡°Both families lost a child. As he grows up and he starts understanding more, he¡¯s going to have to come to terms with what happened. And he¡¯s going to have to live with that.¡±
The boy¡¯s family has yet to speak publicly. They were not known well by their neighbors, who said the children were rarely let outside. When any of the siblings did ask the neighborhood children to play, they would say they had sneaked out.
On Facebook, MaKayla¡¯s friends and family changed their profile pictures to the same photo of the girl ? a playful smirk across her face and her left hand in a peace sign with gold, purple and pink beads on her wrist. In the comments of every image, mourners called for prayer.
¡°Pray for God to wrap his arms around all of you,¡± one comment said. Another: ¡°Praying that God comforts your heart and gives you peace and understanding.¡± Another: ¡°Rest in Peace sweet baby.¡±
Everything is quiet now at the White Pine mobile home park. There used to be a makeshift memorial to MaKayla outside her door ? balloons, flowers, a prayer candle ? but family members collected the offerings.
Baby carriages and a little girl¡¯s bike lie among the trailers. A yellow lab mix with a dirty head paces across the driveway. The families of the alleged shooter and the victim have gone to stay elsewhere.
¡°It don¡¯t feel right with her not here,¡± Edwards said. ¡°I¡¯m used to her coming over and her knocking on the door.¡±
Edwards has told her daughter MaKayla is in heaven. She won¡¯t come out to play anymore, won¡¯t ride the miniature four-wheeler.
Edwards said Riley struggles to understand. She says her friend is at the doctor. Edwards tells her no. She¡¯s with Jesus. Riley says she hates that somebody took away her friend.
Edwards is trying to save money to move out of the trailer park. She doesn¡¯t want to be near what happened. For now, though, she finds herself staying awake at night, just to watch her daughter sleep.
During the day, she watches Riley walk outside, watches her look up to the sky.
SPOILER ALERT: This blog is for those who are watching series one of Peaky Blinders. Don't read on if you haven't seen episode six.
Click here to read Julia Raeside's episode five blogpost
And that's it. Tommy lives to fight another day. The Peaky Blinders are going legit and Campbell's ultimate plan for revenge ? to leave the gangs to kill each other ? has failed. But is Grace's lifeless corpse now prone on the train platform, a triumphant but heartbroken Campbell weeping next to her? My guess is his self-loathing, helpfully highlighted in that rather unpleasant brothel scene, is so great he turns the gun on himself, but wants Grace to see his suicide so she knows it's her fault. Also, a second series may be in the works and Sam Neill probably only signed up for one. Maybe they're already scouting for a new nemesis to pit against Cillian Murphy's unforgiving cheekbones.
We began this final episode with a last trip to Chinatown where only red lightbulbs are available. Campbell goes to the Chinese tailor and, like a teenage boy buying his first grot mag, asks for his special service. He is clearly a man at the end of his sexual tether, having been rejected by Grace and betrayed to boot. The special service apparently includes a young girl and use of a louche parlour, with a shirt-pressing service thrown in.
Meanwhile, Tommy rallies the gang and tells them that today is the day they will bring down Billy Kimber. They bump into Campbell as he tucks his shirt back in. Obviously they had to go to Chinatown to pick up their suits so they'd look nice for the battle. The raid is set for Worcester races but Kimber has been tipped off and cuts the Peaky Blinders off at the pass, bringing the fight to Garrison Lane. Those stand-off shots were beautifully directed, if derivative. That's been the problem with the whole series, I think. It could have been the British Boardwalk Empire, if only it had existed on its own terms, rather than trying to simultaneously ape a lager commercial and its American predecessor. There's no denying it looked superb, but it felt less inventive and more observant of other shooting styles.
The best Aunt Pol scene of the series was saved until this week as she suddenly explained to Ada that she'd had her children taken away over an argument about some stolen sheets. This would have been useful in establishing her character early on. The women in this series ? Grace, Ada and Pol ? all could have done with more flesh on their bones, figuratively speaking. But then Tommy was little more than an ex-soldier, hardened by the horrors of war. Ada mentions to Grace, when she's giving it the full Joan Collins at the Garrison, that Tommy wanted to work with horses before the war. But he's still a thumbnail as far as I can see.
It all ends thus: U2's Love Is Blindness (the Jack White version, obviously) plays as Tommy lines up headed note paper in a typewriter. He writes to Grace and tells her he'll decide whether to come to New York with her in three days. Campbell points a gun at her on the train platform. There is a bang. Roll titles.
I did come to enjoy my weekly visits to Small Heath despite the rocky start, but I wanted more depth, more showing and less telling. If it does come back next year, like Grace and Tommy, I think I may have moved on.
Campbell reads his letter to Grace in voiceover while he bangs away at the unfortunate young prostitute in Chinatown. I see what they were trying to do but it just looks like he's dictating the letter mid-coitus.
? "I will never forgive you or accept you or take you in," says Pol to Grace, setting up a battle between the two women if there is a series two. Clang.
? "You're bad men but you're our bad men," says the deposed landlord of the Garrison to Tommy, trying to sum up the entire series in one lumpen sentence.
? "We only found 24 of those 25 Lewis guns ¡¦" mentions the Brummie copper when he's warning Campbell that it's all kicking off in Small Heath. A great time to remember this fact. But I did enjoy said copper's sarcasm-o-thon later on where he explained to Campbell that the Peaky Blinders would get away with murder because Campbell had cleared all police officers from the area.
Ada is brought out of the mothballs for the final episode, but only because her contextual necessity (Freddy) is freed from prison. With Freddy back in the fold, he joins the Blinders for their final showdown and she appears, pushing her pram, intent on stopping their bullets with her sentimental speech. That moment made me do a full body cringe and even the actor playing Ada looked a bit sheepish.
When Campbell went back to meet Winston Churchill on his party train, it finally hit me who Winston looks like ? the singer from Keane. That had been bugging me from episode one.
That squeaky sound when the cork comes out of the whisky bottle was ever-present tonight. I'd guess around 10 times this episode. I wonder how many times the sound effects guy had to do that over the whole series. (I realise the fact I'm wondering about this is not a good sign.)
So what did you think? If there is a second series, will you be back?
A 17-year-old youth killed on a north London estate may have been the victim of a pre-arranged clash between rival gangs, it was claimed today.
The victim, named as Marvin Henry, was found with a fatal gunshot wound to his torso after police were called to the former Inglis Barracks site in Mill Hill following reports of youths fighting at 12.25am today.
First reports claimed he had been stabbed, but residents on Bray Road, where he was found, reported hearing two or three gunshots. Police confirmed tonight that the victim was shot.
Detectives were questioning 10 male youths and a 21-year-old woman, all arrested at the scene ? nine of them on suspicion of murder and two on suspicion of violent disorder. The youngest is aged 14.
One avenue of investigation is that the victim ? known in the area as "Spooky" ? may have been killed during a pre-planned fight between more than a dozen young people. Friends who laid flowers at the scene today said they thought the killing could have been linked to an "ongoing dispute" between one youth and several others in the neighbourhood.
Detective Chief Inspector Nicky Wall, heading the investigation, said: "The circumstances leading up to the death are still unclear."
The victim, who is known to police, is the second teenager in four days to be murdered in London, and the 17th this year.
As grieving family members visited the scene, one resident described hearing a group of youths in the night then hearing?gunshots.
The 55-year-old, who did not want to be named, said: "There was a group of 15 or 16 youths who were all running down the alleyway. Then there was definitely two or three gunshots.
"A body was lying on the ground. There were two people on top of him, shouting and screaming, crying 'Oh my God.'"
A procession of stunned friends, many of them teenagers, visited the spot throughout the day. One broke down as he said: "Marvin was one of the good guys. One of the quiet ones. He was no gang member."
But others left messages on social networking sites referring to him as a "fallen soldier" and warning of revenge attacks.
A teenage girl laying flowers said: "He loved rap. He never stopped spitting lyrics, he always talked in lyrics, he never talked properly." Asked if he had any problems, she said: "He was a teenage boy. It's just what happens here."
Richard Harris, 20, whose one-year-old-son, Tyler, is Marvin's godson, said: "He wasn't one of those 'gang bang kids'. He wasn't anything like that at all. This is something outrageous."
He was said to have "loads of friends" on the estate and spend a lot of his time there, though he lived half-a-mile away, where friends gathered outside the family's terraced house to console his mother, Lynette Campbell.
It also emerged two of his brothers were convicted of killing a teenager. His older brother, Lloyd Henry, 23, and half-brother, Andre Campbell, 27, are serving jail sentences for killing 19-year-old Ian Page in Edgware Road in November 2006. According to friends, Marvin had recently finished at a pupil referral unit, the Pavilion Study Centre, which educates pupils excluded from mainstream schools.
Among the messages left with the flowers, one read: "Love you Marvin. Wheelie those clouds!!! B." and another said: "Liccle Marvin It's Peak G. I don't even know what to say. Words can't describe how I'm feeling right now. RIP Bro."
Another read: "To one of da good Brothers."
In recent weeks, residents have reported problems with drug dealers, and some said "gang warfare" had broken out.
He is the second teenager in less than a week to be killed in the capital. Samuel Adelagun, 16, of Newham, was shot in the chest by two gunmen wearing balaclavas in Plaistow, east London, on Saturday.
A new study from Australia shows how the country¡¯s sweeping gun law reform was followed by a decline in mass shootings, homicides and suicides in the last two decades ? changes that researchers said could inform US gun policy.
Since 49 people were killed in the Pulse nightclub shooting in Orlando, gun control advocates have again presented Australia as an example of successful gun reform.
After the April 1996 shooting in Australia where one man killed 35 people and wounded 19 others using two semi-automatic rifles, the country banned rapid-fire long guns. And the government introduced severe criminal penalties for people found to possess a prohibited weapon.
Philip Alpers, a co-author of the study , also estimated in a previous study that since 1996, one-third of the country¡¯s firearms have been destroyed through firearm buyback programs that were started during these sweeping reforms.
As the Guardian explained as part of its weeklong investigation into gun control, attempting something similar in the US would not only prompt what gun rights supporters have called a ¡°civil war¡±, it would require buying some 90m guns at a cost that could be in the billions.
Nonetheless, Alpers said, new findings published in the online edition of the Journal of the American Medical Association show how such a public safety intervention ? if implemented ? could affect gun violence rates in the US.
¡°Although America led the world in successful campaigns to reduce the death toll from car crashes, tobacco-related disease and HIV/Aids, when it comes to gun death, it seems ideology and politics are delaying standard public health measures,¡± Alpers said.
By analyzing Australian government data, Alpers and his fellow University of Sydney researchers found that two decades after Australia introduced these sweeping reforms, the risk of an Australian dying by gunshot dropped by more than half. These reforms were also followed by an end to fatal mass shootings, defined as five or more people dead.
In that 20-year period, the number of firearms deaths also fell rapidly. From 1979 to 1996, the firearm death rate declined, on average, 3% per year, while from 1997 to 2013, the death rate declined at an average of 4.9% per year.
¡°We are unaware of any other nation that has enacted such a substantial change in gun laws as has been implemented in Australia,¡± the authors said in the study. ¡°Comparative studies of Australia¡¯s experience with broadly comparable nations would provide further evidence of the effects of such law reform.¡±
Alpers said he hopes these latest findings can inject more evidence into the debate over gun control across the globe. ¡°In some countries, evidence may take longer to prevail over fear and ideology,¡± Alpers said.
Daniel Webster, a professor at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health who studies gun violence, wrote in an accompanying editorial that evidence shows some US state policies are associated with a reduction in gun violence.
But to get these changes, Webster wrote, Americans need to push harder for reform.
¡°Research evidence should inform the way forward to advance the most effective policies to reduce violence. However, research alone will not be enough.
¡°Australian citizens, professional organizations and academic researchers all played productive roles in developing and promoting evidence-informed policies and demanding that their lawmakers adopt measures to prevent the loss of life and terror of gun violence,¡± Webster wrote. ¡°Citizens in the United States should follow their lead.¡±
Among those injured when gunman Chris Harper Mercer opened fire at a community college in Oregon was an army veteran who has been praised as a hero for protecting his classmates.
Chris Mintz, 30, was shot a number of times while trying to protect his classmates by charging straight at the gunman and trying to block the door to keep him from entering the classroom, his aunt, Wanda Mintz said.¡°Tries to block the door to keep the gunman from coming in, gets shot three times, hits the floor, looks up at gunman and says it¡¯s my son¡¯s birthday today, gets shot two more times,¡± Mintz¡¯s aunt, Wanda Mintz, told KCPQ. He was shot on the same day as his son Tyrik¡¯s sixth birthday.
Mintz was shot in the back, abdomen and hands, and has two broken legs. According to his other aunt Sheila Brown, Mintz had just started college after serving about 10 years in the army.
¡°We were told he did heroic things to protect some people,¡± Brown told NBC.
Mintz was smiling in the hospital in a photo posted by John Knicely, a local news anchor, who tweeted:He moved to Oregon from North Carolina and was shot several times, Brown said. ¡°He was on the wrestling team and and he¡¯s done cage-fighting so it does not surprise me that he would act heroically,¡± she said.
Mintz was resting on Friday, according to a Facebook page that seems to belong to him.
¡°This is Chris¡¯s friend, Chris asked me to thank everyone for their support, he is grateful and keeping our community and all victims in his thoughts,¡± read one post.
¡°He is resting and in pain but smiling and the sam[e] ol Chris,¡± read another post.
At least 10 people were killed and seven were wounded in the attack on the Umpqua Community College campus in the rural town of Roseburg.
Kenny Ungerman, 25, a navy veteran, revealed this was the second shooting that he had witnessed in Roseburg.
He said: ¡°It¡¯s crazy that this has happened. I was also at Roseburg high school, when that shooting happened back in 2006, so it¡¯s crazy to think that I¡¯ve been on campus when another shooting has happened,¡± he told MSNBC, referring to the previous incident when a student walked into the school with a weapon and wounded one student, before walking to a restaurant and surrendering to police.
Ungerman, in his first year in the school¡¯s medic program, said he had just come out of a writing class at Snyder Hall and was talking to the national guard recruiter when ¡°we heard a gunshot.¡± He said he saw the gunman with his weapon, and hid behind his jeep when he heard the gunshots.
¡°It sounded like a handgun. It wasn¡¯t loud enough to be an assault rifle,¡± Ungerman told NBC News.
¡°Then I saw a guy with a handgun right outside ? he was wearing jeans and a T-shirt. He was going toward the building, and he just disappeared into the building.¡±
Ungerman said he heard people running and screaming, ¡°He has a gun!¡± and ¡°He¡¯s shooting!¡±
¡°I only saw him for a split second,¡± Ungerman said.
Before going into spinal surgery, Anastasia Boylan, 18, recounted her ordeal to her father from her hospital bed, explaining how the gunman, open firing, had entered her classroom. It was her fourth day of college.
¡°I¡¯ve been waiting to do this for years,¡± the gunman told the professor who was teaching the class, before shooting the teacher point blank, Boylan said.
Others were hit and everyone in the classroom dropped to the ground.
The gunman ordered the students to stand up and asked if they were Christians, Boylan told her family.
¡°And they would stand up and he said, ¡®Good, because you¡¯re a Christian, you¡¯re going to see God in just about one second,¡± Boylan¡¯s father, Stacy, told CNN recounting what his daughter had seen.
¡°And then he shot and killed them.¡±
Boylan was hit in the back by a bullet that had gone down her spine. While she lay bleeding on the floor, the gunman called out: ¡°Hey you, blonde woman,¡± her mother said.
Julie Woodworth was shot multiple times and has undergone one of a number of planned surgeries, according to a GoFundMe page created by her friend Chrislynne Michelle.
According to Twitter posts, Woodworth is in Eugene at the PeaceHealth Sacred Heart Medical Center at RiverBend. Hospital officials could not confirm this.
Three female victims were at PeaceHealth Sacred Heart Medical Center at RiverBend in Springfield, according to a hospital spokeswoman.
Woodworth works at the Walmart Supercenter in Roseburg, according to a Walmart spokesman. Her Facebook page says she is a fan of Oregon Ducks Football, the San Francisco 49ers and numerous musicians including Death Cab for Cutie, Lana Del Rey and the Black Keys.
Kortney Moore, 18, said she survived the shooting by playing dead. Moore was in a writing class when a shot came through the window of Snyder Hall. She saw her teacher get shot in the head, reported News Review.
The gunman entered the classroom and told people to get on the ground, she said. He asked people to stand up and state their religion and then started firing. Moore was lying there with people who had been shot, and said she survived by lying on the ground amid bleeding gunshot victims until the shooting stopped.
Cheyenne Fitzgerald, 17, was among those injured, her cousin Kylie Fitzgerald told BuzzFeed.
¡°She was shot in the stomach and lost a kidney,¡± Kylie Fitzgerald said.
Cheyenne underwent surgery on Thursday afternoon, according to Fitzgerald, and was in an intensive care unit and ¡°is doing better now¡±, she added.
Cheyenne had only recently started studying at the college, her cousin said.
The hour immediately after injury is crucial for both saving life and minimising disability. My job entails trying to treat victims of this kind of penetrating trauma as soon as possible. We aim to get to the scene and deliver the kind of care you would get in an intensive care unit but in this pre-hospital arena.
Part of my responsibility as an A&E consultant is for our helicopter and fast-response cars that cover the London area. We deal with trauma: road traffic accidents, falls, gun- and knife-penetrative trauma.
We do a shooting about once or twice a week - only life-threatening ones. When the 999 call comes in to the control room in Waterloo they will root out the really serious ones and call them back to confirm the details; there are a lot of hoaxes and minor stabbings and shootings that we won't attend. If the person is very ill, they'll send a helicopter to the scene. There is always a team standing by on the helipad, made up of a doctor trained in emergency medicine, anaesthesia and surgical skills, a paramedic on secondment from the ambulance service and the pilots. They will swing into action and aim to be airborne within three minutes and at the patient's side anywhere in London within 12 minutes of the 999 call.
We wear body armour for all assault, stabbing and gunshot missions and we don't go in unless there is a police presence. We don't want to land in the heat of the incident. A scene that has been declared safe can often become unsafe again.
Most days the team are exposed to events that other doctors might only see once every six months. It allows the team to become extremely proficient. They are not fazed by what could seem to many people bizarre or shocking circumstances. We know when we go to a shooting exactly what we're going to do. It doesn't come as a surprise.
The first thing we do is establish how much damage has been done internally. With gunshot wounds there is frequently an operation that is required to stop the bleeding and if the patient can't breathe because of damaged lungs or cracked ribs we can put them on a life support machine. Once they're stable we evacuate them to the appropriate hospital with the right facilities.
Occasionally the injuries are extremely severe and the heart may have stopped. In those situations we have to operate on them at the scene. We can open the chest and stitch the heart if it's been damaged and remove blood from the heart cavity that might be stopping it from beating. That is the extreme edge of what we can do.
We tend to see most of this knife and gun activity at night when we are on fast response in our cars (the helicopter only flies during the day). These events are very threatening situations, when you feel real danger. A team was out last week - and this is not uncommon - in a crack house treating a gunshot victim when they were threatened. Someone had been shot and there were people there on drugs who thought the only way to look after their mate was to deliver the ultimatum: 'If you let him die, doc, you're going to die.'
A lot of people arrive at the ED themselves. If they've been shot they don't want the police involved. They come in and take over the resuscitation room. Obviously a gang event has gone on and they are very tense. You can't confront these people - you know they're high or whatever - and they wouldn't think twice about popping you.
We have seen a slow increase in gun crime. Where it might have once been a particular hard core using weapons, knives and guns are now being used in far less serious disputes. Especially knives: they've become almost a replacement for fists. It's not happening in alleys at night, but shopping centres and playgrounds in the day. It's taking on a different demeanour and that is the most worrying thing. People like to think that it's clandestine and drug-related. It isn't: it's the squabbles of kids in the street.
¡¤ Dr Gareth Davies, 38, is a consultant in Accident and Emergency and Pre-Hospital Care, at the Royal London Hospital
A suspect has been arrested after he approached a White House security checkpoint with a firearm on Friday afternoon.
The man was shot by secret service and transported to George Washington University hospital in critical condition.
The secret service put the White House on lockdown immediately after the incident but that was later lifted.
A section of Pennsylvania Avenue, part of 17th Street and Lafayette Square, remained closed to the public, cordoned off by yellow ¡°authorized personnel only¡± tape. Onlookers were gathering and taking pictures, prompting occasional shouted warnings from the secret service to stay back.
A secret service spokesman, David Iacovetti, said that just after 3pm the man approached the publicly accessible White House entrance at 17th and E Streets with a firearm visible.
¡°Uniformed division officers gave numerous verbal commands for the subject to stop and drop the firearm,¡± he said. ¡°When the subject failed to comply with the verbal commands, he was shot once by a secret service agent and taken into custody.¡±
A White House official said no one in or associated with the White House was injured and that everyone inside was safe and had been accounted for.
Ranjit Singh, who works near where the incident happened, said he saw a ¡°white guy¡± with a gun in his right hand approaching police who were yelling at him to drop it.
Barack Obama was not at the White House at the time of the incident. The president had left earlier in the day for the golf course at Andrews air force base in Maryland. Officials have not said how or if Obama was secured after the secret service learned about the shooting incident. Obama has been made aware of the shooting.
Vice-President Joe Biden was in the White House complex at the time and was secured during the lockdown, his office said.
First lady Michelle Obama was wrapping up a speech in downtown Washington at midday on Friday. Her office would not say where she and the Obama daughters were at the time.Veteran peace protester Philipos Melaku-Bello, 54, was outside the White House when the panic began. He estimated there were about 250 people and it was just before 3.20pm. ¡°I knew from the immediacy in the secret service¡¯s voice how dire it was,¡± he said.
¡°Some people were in a panic because when they hear the secret service shouting they know it¡¯s serious. I¡¯m a protester for world peace so it¡¯s too close for comfort.¡±
Melaku-Bello said he has been demonstrating outside the White House for 34 years and evacuations of the public can take place 10 times a week, but ones with ¡°this immediacy¡± only happen about 15 times a year.
The regular flow of tourists has been abruptly halted. Colleen McKearney, 29, visiting from Seattle, said: ¡°We have no idea what¡¯s happening. We were going to look at the White House. We¡¯ll be patient and come back in a little bit.¡±
Jason Wilson, 45, was lining up for entry to the White House, where he and about 60 other people were due to receive awards for volunteer service, when he heard a gunshot.
¡°I thought it was a tyre on a truck that exploded,¡± he recalled. ¡°Then I looked at my friend and said, ¡®Could that have been a gunshot?¡¯ Then the secret service said, ¡®Move! Move!¡¯ They were prompt.¡±
Wilson, founder and chief executive the NGO The Yunion, added: ¡°Of course at the back of your mind you think ¡®Could it be a terrorist attack?¡¯ but we were all calm. I¡¯m from Detroit. Just stay calm. What¡¯s there to be scared of?¡±
Reuters and the Associated Press contributed to this report
A lawyer for one of two Russian servicemen on trial in Ukraine has been found shot dead, according to officials.
Yuri Grabovsky was representing Alexander Alexandrov, who was captured along with another Russian last year in rebel-held eastern Ukraine.
The two men admitted they were Russian officers but Moscow said they had resigned from active duty. Russia has repeatedly denied it was supplying the separatists with equipment or recruits.
The Ukrainian National Bar Association said in a statement on Friday that Grabovsky, who was declared missing earlier this month, had been found dead. The group said suspects had been detained.
Hearings in the trial of the two Russians were adjourned in early March when Grabovsky did not appear in court.
Anatoly Matios, the chief military prosecutor, said Grabovsky¡¯s body was found with a gunshot wound early on Friday morning buried south of the capital, Kiev, after a suspect had told prosecutors about the location. Another suspect in the killing was detained later, he said.
The prosecutor would not immediately identify the motive for the killing or reveal the names of the suspects.
Ambushed by fighters of the Mahdi army, the soldiers of the Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment attacked with everything they had, from bayonets to tank shells.
The fierce gunfight became known as the Battle for Danny Boy, the name British troops gave to a junction on Route 6, just south of Amara on the road to Basra.
If allegations made yesterday are true, the battle on May 14 2004 also led to the torture and execution of up to 20 Iraqi civilians, some of whom were mutilated before they died. It may be that British soldiers and officers covered up "one of the most atrocious episodes in British army history," lawyer Martyn Day said yesterday.
Allegations of mistreatment of Iraqi civilians at Camp Abu Naji, the British base near Amara, were first reported in the Guardian a month after the battle. Military police were asked to investigate and cleared the soldiers of any wrongdoing.
Day and fellow lawyer Phil Shiner pursued the case of the surviving Iraqi civilians and collected witness statements. Last month, a report by a senior army officer admitted that British troops deployed in Iraq were given "scant" information on how to treat civilian detainees and needed "a better understanding between right and wrong".
This month, the high court dismissed an attempt to prevent the Guardian from repeating the original allegations of serious abuse of Iraqis by British soldiers, and described the way the Ministry of Defence handled the case as "barmy".
In London yesterday, the lawyers disclosed fresh witness statements by five of the Iraqis, photographs of corpses and death certificates of the men who died.
Detailed witness statements from the five men - Hussein Jabbari Ali, Hussain Fadhil Abass, Atiyah Sayid Abdelreza, Madhi Jassim Abdullah and Ahmad Jabber Ahmood - describe what they heard while in detention, when they said they were cuffed and forced to wear blacked-out goggles.
The statements tell of hearing other men screaming, moaning in pain and choking, and the sound of gunfire. Abdelreza's statement says: "I believed people were being killed. I have never heard anything like that sound ever before in my life. It shocked me and filled me with such terror."
The five include two farmers, a student, a taxi driver and a baker, according to the statements. Their lawyers said they had "absolutely nothing" to do with the insurgent Mahdi army.
Death certificates of Iraqis who were killed, also disclosed yesterday, describe how they came to their brutal end. "Several gunshot wounds to body - severance of sexual organs," one states. "Gunshot to head," another reads. One notes: "Gunshot in face, pulling out of the eye, breaking the jaw, gunshot to the chest."
Day is seeking compensation for those who survived the alleged ordeal. Shiner is seeking a judicial review of what he says is the failure of the MoD to conduct a proper inquiry into the allegations. The Human Rights Act demands an independent public inquiry when there is prima facie evidence of serious wrongdoing by the state, he has told the high court.
He said yesterday that the record of the army prosecuting authorities demanded that the issue should be taken out of their hands. The attorney general should intervene immediately and Scotland Yard should take over the case, he said.
Shiner admitted that much of the evidence relied on the interpretation of what the five Iraqis heard while blindfolded. No postmortem examinations had taken place on the bodies of the 20 dead men. But on the basis of the evidence he believed his clients were telling the truth.
"It may be that none of this happened. We need a public inquiry to establish the facts." The British soldiers, he said, had been engaged either in "acts of immense bravery or acts of incredible brutality". He added: "We're not saying we know what happened; we're saying on the balance of probabilities we think our clients are telling the truth."
Day said: "The burning question for us as a nation is whether these 24 hours represented the British army at its best or the British army at its worst".
Yesterday's witness statements implied that Iraqi men had been executed by being shot at close range, strangled or having their throats cut, the lawyers said. British soldiers have said they were told to take some bodies of dead Iraqis back to their camp, though it is unclear why.
A Panorama programme on the incident will be broadcast on Monday. A BBC spokesman said yesterday: "Panorama has spent over a year talking to battlefield survivors, medical staff and Iraqi former prisoners in Iraq, Turkey and Jordan.
"The programme critically examines claims made by lawyers who are representing the Iraqis in their action against the British government.
"Of all the allegations they make, the programme concludes that the evidence is strongest that prisoners were mistreated. Panorama has seen no proof that prisoners died at the hands of their captors at or after the Battle of Danny Boy."
A spokesman for the MoD said yesterday: "Allegations of mistreatment, unlawful killing and mutilation by British troops following an incident at Vehicle Checkpoint Danny Boy were thoroughly investigated by the RMP [Royal Military Police].
"Their investigation lasted 10 months, involved the interviewing of over 150 British personnel and 50 Iraqi nationals, and found no evidence to support these allegations. New allegations are part of an ongoing RMP (Special Investigation Branch) investigation and judicial review, and it would be inappropriate to comment further."
Referring to previous cover-ups of abuse by British troops as well as the latest allegations, Shiner said yesterday: "Until we as a nation face up to this evidence we cannot hope for the fundamental reforms required to ensure these things never happen again." He added that the British did not want to be talked about "in the same vein as the Japanese in the second world war or the Americans at My Lai".
In his book Dusty Warriors, Richard Holmes describes the Battle for Danny Boy and its aftermath. He said the British soldiers found that a large crowd had assembled and when they returned to camp they reported that there was "a rumour circulating that the dead had been captured alive and then executed".
The two lawyers said yesterday they had asked the MoD for copies of the army's medical logs, photographs and the military police report into the incident. The ministry, they said, refused to hand them over.
Forensics can make the difference between a killer going to jail or getting away with murder. And that often means hours in the lab for experts like forensic scientist Elaine M Pagliaro of the Henry C Lee Institute of Forensic Science. ¡°It¡¯s important to remember that scientific evidence [also] helps to exonerate the innocent, both before and after trial,¡± she says.
Here, Pagliaro and criminalists from the Los Angeles Police Department reveal the secrets and science of forensic investigations ? and how they all affect cold case results.
¡°Forensic scientists cannot know every detail of what happened,¡± Pagliaro says. ¡°We are not Dexter,¡± the blood spatter expert and serial killer in the fictional TV show of the same name. Contrary to what many believe, she notes, a reconstruction isn¡¯t a reenactment. It¡¯s a detailed setup that helps experts learn more about a sequence of events or answer a specific question, like where a person was standing when an altercation began or whether a particular weapon could have caused a victim¡¯s injuries.
In his cold case investigations, Tim Marcia, an LAPD detective, turns to old murder books to determine if the original detectives relied on crime scene reconstructions. For example, if a victim¡¯s belongings are strewn near a murder site, he checks to see if the placement of items suggests that the killer discarded them or that victim dropped them. The path of evidence can lead to telling clues.
Tangible items that link a suspect to the crime scene are classified as physical evidence. Today¡¯s technology surrounding physical evidence can offer significant help in cold cases, according to Pagliaro. ¡°Even fingerprints that were not visible previously may be developed with some of the new techniques,¡± she says. In 2011, the FBI introduced its Advanced Fingerprint Identification Technology (Afit), which includes an algorithm that has helped improve the accuracy of fingerprint matches from 92% to more than 99.6%.
In the Kari Lenander murder case from 1980, Marcia plans to use the latest technology to his advantage. ¡°I¡¯ve just made another request to have all the fingerprints redone,¡± says Marcia, adding that the analysis could take six weeks to several months.
Specific subsets of physical evidence that contain DNA ? sources like blood, semen, hair, saliva and various tissue ? are biological evidence. For cold cases, these sources can be gamechangers. The first court conviction based on DNA didn¡¯t even come down until 1987.
Cold case DNA evidence is sometimes treated differently than in newer cases, says Pagliaro. ¡°If the sample is degraded ? affected by heat, UV light or moisture ? the biologist may have to employ techniques that have been developed for DNA in those situations,¡± she explains.
In Kari¡¯s case, new DNA technology has helped forensic experts do more with less. In some cold cases, there¡¯s a risk that certain evidence will be depleted ? like when increasingly more fabric is clipped from semen-stained clothing to test. So experts are careful. ¡°I can test smaller samples, samples that are more degraded, and it gives me more information than your older technology,¡± says Nick Sanchez, an LAPD Forensic Science Division criminalist who examined evidence associated with Kari¡¯s case.
When firearms are involved in a murder, investigators may look for gunshot residue on a suspect¡¯s hands or clothing, though some weapons don¡¯t discharge it. Spent bullets are also examined for striations, the marks that match the unique patterns inside the barrel of a gun.
With knife injuries, Pagliaro says a forensic pathologist could investigate a victim¡¯s wounds to help determine the type of weapon used. The width, depth and shape of a cut, as well as the wound¡¯s edges, can help suggest if a smooth, serrated or irregular surface caused the injury.
The FBI¡¯s Combined DNA Index System (Codis), a support system for DNA databases that contains nearly 14m offender and arrestee profiles, helps investigators link local crimes to offenders outside their jurisdictions. And the latest type of DNA analysis ? short tandem repeat, or STR ? means genetic profiles uploaded are more specific than ever. STR analysis, which looks at specific repeating patterns in DNA, can help identify profiles to an incredibly narrow degree. ¡°We typically see profiles where the powers of discrimination are in the quadrillions to the quintillions,¡± says Jennifer Francis, another LAPD criminalist who examined evidence from Kari¡¯s case.
¡°The technology that was done back in the day was much less discriminating,¡± Francis adds. ¡°With the STR technology, [an investigator can see DNA samples] are from the same individual versus, you know, 12% of the population.¡±
Through Codis, DNA profiles are searched to find matches: either linking new crimes to known offenders or matching the same unknown offenders to multiple crimes. Fortunately for Francis and Sanchez, that process is mostly automated: the system runs searches each weekend and by the following Monday returns new matches, which criminalists then check further.
Sanchez believes Codis could ultimately crack Kari¡¯s case. ¡°I know this is one case that Tim always has on his mind,¡± Sanchez says, ¡°and I hope he solves it.¡±
Disclosure: Detective Tim Marcia consults for Bosch, the Amazon Original Series. Stream the new season of Bosch on Amazon Prime Video on 11 March.
This content is paid for by Bosch
¡°I fired my first gunshot when I was nine,¡± says Salih. ¡°For years after that I was very eager to do it again. I owned my first weapon when I got to 14. It was an AK-47.¡±
Salih is now 38, but guns have been a permanent fixture in his life. Growing up in Darfur in one of the Arab tribes that has been at war with other ethnic groups in the region since 2003, he says it quickly became clear the only way to protect his family was to get a weapon of his own.
In the 13 years since war broke out, the UN estimates that more than 300,000 people have been killed in Darfur. Amid the ongoing violent clashes, weapons continue to flow in from neighbouring countries to meet the demand.
Salih, who declined to give his full name, estimates that ¡°in the past, only two or three people in every group of shepherds had a Kalashnikov. Now every member of every group has at least two weapons.¡± Other types of automatic weapons, such as Soviet-era PK machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades, are also freely available, he says.
Although it is widely accepted that the situation has drastically deteriorated, there isn¡¯t any accurate data on the proliferation of weapons across the state.In December, the Sudanese interior ministry released a report estimating there are ¡°millions of small arms and light weapons in the hands of citizens in Darfur¡±, but said the chaos of war had prevented the collection of accurate statistics.
Emile LeBrun of the Small Arms Survey¡¯s Sudan project says the UN set up an expert panel to establish where the guns are coming from but its findings were blocked, reportedly by Russia.
LeBrun says the Khartoum government, under the leadership of Omar al-Bashir, who has been indicted for war crimes in Darfur, is unable to assess or regulate the flow of guns because it ¡°cannot elicit the required trust and compliance of populations that is required for disarmament¡±.
For locals, this distrust is fuelled by what they see as a disingenuous disarmament drive. Fatima Ali, from El-Geneina in western Darfur, points out that while the government has been collecting weapons from some tribes it has been consistently arming others. ¡°That¡¯s why citizens do not trust the government,¡± she says.
The interior ministry says it has ambitions to introduce more regulation and has planned a gun registration initiative. Esmat Abdel Majid, the minister of the interior, said recently that his office had plans to ¡°collect heavy weapons, such as SUVs and heavy cannons. We plan as well to restrict and register small arms. We will then collect them in exchange for financial compensation.¡±
But LeBrun says that there is no way to verify how effective registration drives really are. ¡°[The government has] supposedly registered 20,000 weapons in South and West Darfur ? but there is no way to verify this number and it should be treated with scepticism,¡± the researcher said.
On the ground in Darfur¡¯s numerous weapons markets, traders say restrictions will not affect sales, and that they will continue ¡°selling to anyone who will pay¡± regardless of the planned restrictions.
One trader, who asked to remain anonymous, said that at present ¡°Kalashnikovs cost 7,000 Sudanese pounds (¡Ì701)¡± ? only a little more expensive than in previous years. He explained that the weapons flood in from neighbouring countries, or that traders ¡°sometimes raid other groups or the Unamid [African Union-United Nations Mission in Darfur] troops to take their guns.¡±
Hassan Mattar, a former fighter with the Sudan Liberation Movement in Darfur, says that many of the older guns in circulation come from Libya.
¡°The one who brought most weapons to Darfur is former Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, first when he supported the Sudanese opposition in Darfur in 1976, and then when he supplied the Chadian opposition in 1980s,¡± says Mattar. ¡°He also provided support to armed movements in the beginning of the insurgency in Darfur in 2003.¡±
Khalid Bahar, a Darfuri activist, says the widespread prevalence of weapons has contributed to a dangerous climate of wanton violence. ¡°The situation is more dangerous. First you hear gunshots, then hundreds of young men die and the battles begin,¡± he says.
Many residents, tired of being surrounded by weapons and the threat of violence, are leaving. ¡°I sent my wife and little children to Khartoum to live there,¡± says Salih. ¡°I will never let my children grow here, I want them to be better than me.¡±
This article is part of the Guardian Africa network¡¯s Sudans takeover. For one day we¡¯re handing over the reins to a group of young Sudanese and South Sudanese journalists who have been reporting on the issues facing their countries today. From clubbing to beauty politics, police crackdowns to the ongoing war in Darfur, their stories offer a new way to understand this under-reported region
A former imam at a west London mosque known for his staunch criticism of the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, has been found dead with gunshot wounds.
A murder investigation was launched after a man named locally as Syrian-born Abdul Hadi Arwani, the former imam at An-noor mosque, was discovered in his car in Wembley, north-west London, on Tuesday morning.
The Metropolitan police, who have not formally identified the man, say he was discovered sitting in a dark-coloured Volkswagen Passat in Greenhill, at the junction with The Paddocks in Wembley.
Officers were called to Wembley by the London ambulance service in response to reports of a man found suffering what are believed to be gunshot injuries to his chest.
A postmortem examination will be arranged in due course, the Met said.
Supporters posted tributes to the preacher on Twitter, with one person writing: ¡°It seems like the entire community is in a state of mourning.¡±
Arwani studied in Jordan before moving to the UK where he taught in Slough and West London, according to the London College for Islamic Studies, which describes him as an authority on marriage and divorce.He was also known for his criticism of Assad regime, which he described as ¡°more than criminal...less than animals¡±. During the 2012 Syria Crisis Week he spoke about his memories of his home country, including his experience of the 1982 Hama massacre that occurred when he was aged 16. Arwani said he was forced to flee Syria after he was sentenced with capital punishment for taking pictures of the aftermath of the massacre.
The investigation into his death is being carried out by detectives from the Met¡¯s homicide and major crime command.
A police statement said: ¡°At this very early stage detectives retain an open mind regarding the possible motive.¡±
They appealed for anyone in the area from about 10am who may have seen a dark-coloured VW Passat or anything suspicious to get in touch. Local roads have been sealed off as the investigation continues.
This album begins with a woman on a rooftop alone, singing to the birds, her voice gutsy, darkly magical. Since her first album away from her folk dynasty family, 2015¡¯s Two Wolves, with outstanding guitarist David A Jaycock, Marry Waterson¡¯s many talents have been unfurling themselves, like late-season roses bursting from cut branches. This record¡¯s mood is bracing and physical, swaying between solo Sandy Denny and tracks by Waterson¡¯s own mother Lal on the recently reissued Bright Phoebus, its backing band from the worlds of alternative pop and rock (Portishead¡¯s Adrian Utley produces, while Kathryn Williams, John Parish and Romeo Stodart provide subtle support). These abstract, poetic songs ? about crowns of dead maidens (the title track) children leaving home (the devastatingly gentle Forgive Me), and punishing relationships (the darkly erotic Gunshot Lips) ? enter the bones too. Throughout, Waterson¡¯s command wrenches, cossets and hugely impresses.
It was autumn, and Patricia van Tighem and her husband, Trevor Janz, were hiking in Waterton Lakes National Park, Canada. As they passed into a dense pine forest, Patricia had a sense of foreboding. Something was not right. Trevor called her paranoid, and they resumed their climb. It was a popular trail. There seemed no reason for concern. Yet as they came into view of a waterfall, Patricia stopped again. An awful smell hit her, but Trevor dismissed it. A bighorn sheep had died just off the trail and though she didn't know it, she could smell its decomposing body. Patricia worried aloud about bears, but Trevor's enthusiasm won out and they pressed on up the trail.
Trevor rushed ahead, eager as always to plunge onward. He disappeared round a bend and Patricia hurried to follow. But as she came within sight of him, something was out of place. It took a?moment before she could comprehend what she was seeing. Trevor was down and a bear's jaws were around his leg.
The bear charged Patricia so fast that she could scarcely take it in. Their eyes met for a moment. Then the bear took her head in its mouth and began chewing. She could feel its teeth scraping across her skull, ripping away her eye and half of her face. Patricia thought of her mother and of all the people who would be destroyed by her death, and she reached up and twisted the huge black nose before her. The bear barked and stood aside. It began pacing in front of her. Patricia played dead.
Silence fell at last. Patricia began to stand and felt that something was wrong with her head. She was in the snow, hypothermic and near death, when hikers came to her aid. Somehow they managed to get her down the trail and to find a?search-and-rescue team. Not until she reached the hospital did she learn that Trevor was?expected to live.
Her stay in the hospital was a torture of surgical procedures interrupted by hallucinations, flashbacks and nightmares. The bear was in the hall, stalking Patricia in her dreams. For weeks of that autumn, in 1983, she was completely blind, adding to her disorientation. The bear took not only her skin and scalp but the muscles of the neck that held up her head. The surgeons took part of her back muscle and grafted it in place as a substitute. Skin from her buttocks was taken to cover her neck and head. That procedure alone took 12 hours. She was informed that her left eye, where the bear had eaten away the cheekbone, would never see or move again.
Patricia was 24. She had been working as a?hospital nurse, and Trevor was a third-year medical student. A month after the attack, they were able to leave the hospital, to visit her parents. On that outing, it first became clear that Patricia and Trevor were about to take radically divergent courses. Patricia's response was terror and shame at her disfigurement. She felt weak and vulnerable, apprehensive that the car would crash on the way home. She now experienced the?world around her as an intensely hazardous place. Arriving at the home where she had grown up, she felt overwhelmed. "I am a stranger in some way," she said, echoing many who survive severe trauma.
Trevor was disfigured, too, his head and face crisscrossed with stitches, his jaw broken, his leg ripped open and sewn back together. And yet, as they left the hospital that day, he was singing, despite the fact that his jaw was wired shut. Again and again, he said he felt lucky and grateful to be alive. One evening, he smuggled a wheelchair to Patricia's room and sneaked her out of the ward to see the beautiful view. That night he said he wanted to get out of the hospital and go ice climbing. In his mind, he was rapidly moving on?from the experience.
Although they had survived almost the same experience, the differences in their responses grew greater over time. Patricia simply longed for?the return of a normal life. Trevor's response seemed to be: I'm a new man. Let's see what I?can?do. Neither Patricia nor Trevor could eat solid?food at first. But while Patricia grew thinner, Trevor took a blender to the hospital and put in ice-cream and lasagne, so he could ingest enough calories to gain weight. By the time they were able to leave the hospital, Trevor was losing patience with Patricia for reliving the incident. They stayed at Patricia's parents' house at first, and she would sit in the living room looking out of the window, vigilant, expecting at any moment?to see a grizzly bear heaving into view. Trevor and her parents went out for walks, but Patricia was too afraid to join them. Exasperated, alone in the house, she would shout out loud at herself, "There is nothing out there! Stop it. Stop?looking!"
She and Trevor sought help from a?psychotherapist. Trevor voiced his frustration with his wife. They had tried to go on a hike together, but after 15 minutes Patricia was ill with trepidation and had to turn back. That night, she had terrifying dreams.
Trevor had nightmares sometimes, too, but his response was not to think about it. He just put it out of his mind. Psychiatrist George Vaillant, in his Study Of Adult Development, found that this type of suppression?was straightforward, practical, and it?worked. "Of all the coping mechanisms," he wrote, "suppression alters the world the least and?best accepts the terms life offers." Contrary to what many psychologists would have you believe, he says, simply suppressing a traumatic experience and getting on with business is "the defensive style most closely associated with successful adaptation". Trevor forced this hard-nosed logic to dominate over emotion, telling his wife, "We won't be attacked again, Trish. We're predisastered." (In?quoting from the movie The World According To Garp, he was employing one of the best strategies for successful adaptation: humour.) In the midst of the attack, Trevor recalled feeling distant and philosophical about it. He had seen the bear attack Patricia and was under the impression that she had been killed. When the bear returned to attack Trevor for a second time, he later told his wife that he was convinced he'd die, but his only reaction was curiosity. He thought: "So this is how I die." Patricia's response to the bear was pure panic and?terror.
Patricia had been more severely injured than her husband, which may explain to some extent the differences in their responses. Because the bear bit into her face, she had repeated operations on her sinuses. Within weeks of each surgery, infection would set in again. More surgery would follow. Her head and face ached all the time. Patricia needed to experience her body healing in order to make progress, and that just wasn't happening.
Also, their experiences of the attack had been different in one crucial way. Trevor had had no premonition about the bear. Patricia had ignored the clear warning she had felt.
Lisette duPre Brieger had premonitions, too. She and Marshall Johnson worked in the same office. At the annual Christmas party, she saw him sharpening an axe. She thought it odd, but they worked for an oil company that owned a 400-acre farm in the Virginia countryside. Maybe the axe was for chopping firewood out there.
Lisette liked Marshall. A friend had driven her?to the party, but when Marshall offered her a ride home, Lisette accepted. As they drove, Marshall asked if she'd ever been out to the farm. She had not. Marshall drove out into the countryside, parking by the farm, then reached into the back seat for the axe. Without having to think about it, Lisette threw open the door and began running across the snow-covered ground in her high heels. She was struggling towards the farmhouse when she glanced back and saw Marshall standing in the illumination from the headlights, looking puzzled.
"What are you doing?" he called out.
She hesitated. What was that in his hands? Not the axe. A little box. Lisette walked back, now conscious of how wet her feet were, how terrified she had been.
"Open it," he said. "What were you doing?"
"I thought you might be about to murder me with that axe."
"I'm hardly an axe murderer," he said with a?chuckle. All at once it was a joke. And the flicker of something sinister that she had seen in the car subsided beneath the surface once again.
The box contained a necklace. She was the administrative assistant at the company, and he was technically one of her bosses, so this was in keeping with the Christmas tradition. Even so, Lisette was touched. How silly of me, she thought. And what an odd thing to think, that he wanted to kill me. Where had that come from?
By October 4 2009, Lisette and Marshall had been married for 21 years. They had two children, Graham, just turned 10, and Natalie, 11. The psychological and verbal abuse had become extreme. Lisette had told Marshall she was leaving.
Lisette had felt a sense of foreboding the day before. She had celebrated their son Graham's birthday with eight of his friends. There had been?Toy Story at the cinema and birthday cake at?home. That evening, Marshall was acting strange. He had been threatening her, first saying that he'd never see the children again if she left and then that she'd never get custody because she was crazy.
The next morning was Sunday. She had plans to meet her friend Gretchen, but found her husband sitting on the bed in the guest room looking upset. Lisette turned and went to her bedroom. Marshall followed, saying, "I want to know how you are going to live when you leave here. What are you going to live on?" He stormed out. Lisette sat to check her email. Then Marshall returned with a towel over his hand.
Lisette stood immediately, suddenly knowing. She stood at the exact moment he pulled the trigger, firing point blank at her head. And because?she stood, instead of sitting there in disbelief, the bullet struck her not in the head but?halfway between her collarbone and her right breast. She bolted for the open door and he fired a?second time, hitting her in the abdomen. As she?ran across the yard, she screamed for the children. He fired again, hitting her in the back. She could hear her daughter screaming, "What's wrong? What's happened?"
Lisette managed to call out, "Daddy shot?me!"?She heard another shot but felt nothing: that last shot had been for him. She?collapsed in?a?pile of leaves.
Lisette was given 10 units of blood in the emergency room. Both of her lungs had collapsed. She still has one?of the bullets in her liver. But?she got up by herself in the first?week. She returned to work, took care of the children. She functioned.
She took the children to visit her family for New Year and, like Patricia, Lisette began to feel how such extreme survival sets you apart. "I?was?surrounded by love," she said, "but I?had this odd?sense of isolation. Difference. Like I?knew something they didn't."
The children experienced hysterical crying jags. Lisette had to stand in the middle of it, trying to calm them when she, too, felt like curling up in a?ball and falling apart. Back at home during the first week of 2010, she went through the motions. She took Graham and Natalie to school, had a shower, made a business call. Then hung up and?burst into tears. This is part of me now, she thought. Part of who I am. "You have to be all right," she told herself, "because you have to take?care of the children."
Spring came. The woods that surrounded the house were exploding with life. Lisette was cleaning out the linen closet when she discovered the bullet hole in the wall. She stared at it, marvelling at how the bullet could have passed through her husband's brain and then through the bedroom wall and through this wall as well. She felt a new sense of peace and detachment.
Lisette began giving talks for the police at the domestic violence task force. Talking, helping others, gave her strength. Her emotions were still?just below the surface, but she gradually began to feel grateful for having any feelings at all. She began to realise how long she had been completely numb in her marriage. She used to feel lonely all the time. Now that she was really alone, she rarely felt true loneliness.
Then something remarkable happened. Lisette was sitting in the waiting room while Graham was?in therapy. An 11-year-old girl named Betty struck up a conversation. Betty told Lisette that she had been shot in the neck and that the bullet was still there. Lisette told her that she, too, had a?bullet in her abdomen. Betty said that her mother had been shot twice and her brother was?shot four times. Her father had done the shooting. Her brother, aged 10, was in the hospital?on a ventilator.
Lisette was trying to hold it together as she listened to this. She told Betty and her sister Ruth?that they would be happy one day, because she was happy. They exchanged phone numbers and, since their mother couldn't drive a car yet, Lisette promised to take the girls to their appointments. She had found something apart from herself to care about. She struggled on, both for the sake of her children and for Betty and Ruth. In that way, she became a rescuer, and left behind the persona of the victim.
For Micki Glenn, confronting the trauma she survived became the key to recovery. She had been on an expedition to scuba dive and photograph sharks off Caicos Bank in the West Indies. Micki managed her husband's practice as a?trauma surgeon. Among the others on the boat were a vascular surgeon and a nurse in an intensive care unit.
Micki was snorkelling, while her husband Mike?was in scuba gear, photographing beneath the surface. Looking down, she was not surprised to see a 7ft-long female shark just beneath her fins. It was their fifth day of diving and Micki and her companions had become accustomed to?having sharks nearby.
The female shark stopped beneath Micki's fins and changed direction. Then the animal moved slowly upright, aligning its body with Micki's until the two were staring at each other. "I?was looking right into her eye, just inches away.?I?saw the slit of her mouth, and the hair was?standing up on the back of my neck. I?thought I?was the luckiest person ever." Micki?held her breath as the shark moved slowly?against her, then glided away.
As she let out her breath, Micki felt a powerful surge of water hit her side, as the shark flipped around and took Micki's arm in its mouth. The shark's upper rows of teeth were across Micki's back all the way to the spine. She felt no pain, only pressure "like I was in a vice". Like many people caught in a life-threatening emergency, Micki described "time slowing down so that I could perceive the most minute details". Like a razor, the lower jaw?sliced her breast. The upper jaw took half her armpit. Then the shark began thrashing with?such?force that Micki suffered whiplash. At?the same time, she was trying to power her left hand around to strike the shark and drive it away. At last the shark slid beneath the boat, taking a?huge chunk of meat with it. It was about eight in?the morning, a beautiful sunny day, on November 14?2002.
Micki looked around and saw four other sharks. The water all around her was not just red but deep crimson. She saw the ragged flesh and the bone of her arm. "The rest of my arm was in the water. I was beyond terror." She began kicking as hard as she could toward the boat, paddling with her uninjured left arm.
On the boat, Mike, the vascular surgeon and the?ICU nurse were on hand with their medical equipment, brought along as a precaution against just such an emergency. Mike groped for the torn end of Micki's brachial artery, which was ejecting a fountain of blood. "That's when the pain hit," Micki said. "It was surgery without anaesthesia. I?started screaming so loud that I couldn't hear." They put her on an IV. "I still didn't think I was going to live through it. I refused pain meds because I didn't want to relax and lose the ability to fight and stay alive."
Micki knew it was important to stay awake and that the pain could help her accomplish that. She developed a mantra: pain is my friend. Micki's mantra carried her through the excruciating journey to the hospital, by dinghy, police boat, helicopter, ambulance and, at last, a Coast Guard jet. When they reached the hospital, a surgeon reconstructed her arm. She underwent six operations over the next two weeks.
But the more profound drama, the ordeal of trying to re-enter the world, began while she was still in hospital. "If I didn't focus on something every minute, as soon as I relaxed, it was like the wall in the hospital would turn into the sea again, and I relived the shark attack over and over and over." To take her mind off the shark, she returned to work just 16 days after the attack, still wearing bandages and plaster.
"The Micki I loved was loud and clear in my head," she told me. "But the new fearful, injured, careful, timid person emerged as the dominant me and, to my dismay, she controlled my actions, my body. The old familiar me had a strong voice and sense of who I should be, but she had no control. She was a ghost. I aligned myself with her, and we hated the alien Micki."
Mike had managed to photograph the shark just before it attacked Micki. Now he put a close-up image of that very shark on her computer, as her screensaver. "Every time I walked in, I had to look?at her again," she said. "It took a week or two, but I was gradually desensitised."
After the accident, Micki had told her husband to get rid of her scuba gear. She never wanted to see it again. He kept it anyway. Two years passed. Then a friend coaxed Micki into taking a trip to Dominica in the Caribbean ? and for two days sat holding Micki's hand at the edge of the water. "The first day I actually went to dive, I threw up my breakfast."
When she was 80ft down, a big barracuda surprised her. "All I saw were teeth. I came completely unglued and crashed into the wall and cried into my mask and got all snotty." She forced herself to stay in the water and work through it. "After Dominica, I felt that I was whole again," she told me.
A decade after their bear attack, Patricia still had not moved on. She and Trevor had children but, while he was working as a doctor, for many days she lay curled up in her room with a blanket over her head, unable to function. Trevor had attacked the world in much the same way as Micki, by seeking new pursuits. When he was in hospital, Trevor had sustained himself in part by dreaming that he would one day go ice climbing. He made that dream a reality. He went mountaineering. He?bought a sailboard and went windsurfing. He built a house to live in and built the furniture for it. And he became, in effect, a single parent.
Patricia, who had been perfectly well-adjusted?before setting out for that hike at the age?of 24, now began her passage through a?series?of psychiatric hospitals, through electro-convulsive therapy, through drugs and therapy and more surgery, through more and more pain and depression.
Fifteen years passed after the attack, yet still Patricia read obsessively about bears and people?being attacked by bears, and wrote compulsively about her experience. She had a?big?family and good social support from her?many siblings and friends. But their well-meaning attempts to cheer?her up ("At least you're alive") merely sent?her into a rage again. When her book The Bear's Embrace was published, it became a?bestseller. Yet nothing seemed to help her get over the attack.
Patricia's temperament actually might have prevented the accident.?When they were going up the trail, she had sensed something. She smelled the dead?sheep and knew it was a?warning signal. She was consciously afraid of bears at that moment. (The?grizzly was feeding on the dead sheep and attacked them in an attempt to protect its find.) Left to her own devices, she might well have turned back. Instead, Trevor's boldness won out. His personality proved much more resilient in the aftermath. And Patricia's apprehension, the very sensitivity that might have saved them, became her greatest liability in the years to come.
On December 14 2005, Patricia van Tighem checked into a hotel in Kelowna, British Columbia, and took her own life, leaving behind?Trevor and four children. She had fought?the bear for 22 years.
? Extracted from Surviving Survival: The Art And?Science of Resilience by Laurence Gonzales,?published by WW Norton on 9?November at ¡Ì18.99. To order a copy for ¡Ì15.19,?with free UK p&p, go to guardian.co.uk/bookshop or call 0330?333 6846.
A 22-hour siege in New Zealand has come to an end with an alleged gunman suspected of shooting four police officers giving himself up.
The man, a 27-year-old, was taken into custody after an all-night police operation near the rural town of Kawerau in the Bay of Plenty.
The siege followed an incident on Wednesday afternoon when a police surveillance plane ? allegedly looking for cannabis plants ? was shot.
Later in the day four policemen received gunshot wounds and authorities cordoned off a rural property where an alleged gunman had barricaded himself inside.
One officer received serious but not life-threatening injuries, two received moderate injuries and one received a gunshot wound to the hand, police said.
Around 2pm on Wednesday the alleged gunman¡¯s friends and family set up a vigil at a police cordon, where they remained all night in deck chairs, draped in hoodies and blankets, and shared a meal and snacks.
Family members told Fairfax New Zealand that they were in touch with the man via text messages, and they wanted a police escort into the house so they could talk to their relative.
Just after 9am on Thursday, a Maori police liaison officer, Warwick Morehu, entered the cordon area, and an arrest was made ? peacefully ? a short time later.
After the arrest the alleged gunman¡¯s family and friends were seen holding a karakia (prayer) and speaking to Morehu, who was dressed in plain clothes.
Two of the police officers who were shot remain in a stable condition in hospital, and two have been discharged.
A child is fighting for life in hospital after being attacked by a dog in Chatham, Kent, as two people remain in police custody.Police shot the animal dead after it bit the child during the incident in the Jenkins Dale area on Tuesday evening.A neighbour said she heard a gunshot and saw the child, reported to be a girl, being carried to an ambulance.The child, said to be a toddler, is in a critical condition in a London hospital. There was no immediate condition update on the child¡¯s condition from police on Wednesday morning.Two people have been arrested and are in custody while inquiries continue, Kent police said.The attack came two days after armed police shot dead two pit bull-type dogs that attacked a man and woman in the street in Bolton, Greater Manchester.Officers were called to Queen¡¯s Park in Chorley New Road on Sunday. Daniel Hennessy, 39, has been charged with allowing dogs to be dangerously out of control.
As inquiries continued in Chatham, Kent police appealed to members of the public who may have footage of the incident to contact police and not to share it on social media.One man wrote on Facebook: ¡°Personally knowing the family and the child involved and seeing the aftermath of such an event has shocked me!¡°Hoping the little girl, which I will not name, is ok and is in the best possible care. I¡¯m with the sister now who is shocked and shaken.¡±Jaspreet Uppal, who lives nearby, told the Press Association: ¡°First I heard a gunshot, there was a dog on the floor. A few officers carried out a child from the back area of the flats.¡°There is a little park there. I could not see the child, they were covered. I think they were quite small.¡±Local MP Tracey Crouch said: ¡°Horrible news from Chatham this evening. My thoughts and prayers are with the child and their family tonight.¡±
Skip Lievsay, an unassuming-looking guy in his mid-60s with highly trained ears, stood before the stacks of speakers and giant movie screen in his office, fussing quietly. Lievsay is one of the preeminent sound designers working in film today, and whatever he does ? whether it¡¯s fussing or making jokes or padding down the hall of his New York offices to murmur instructions to employees ? he does it quietly, as if his personal volume dial operates in inverse correlation to the often noisy task at hand.
On this midwinter afternoon, he was meeting with one of his effects editors, a similarly soft-spoken young man named Larry Zipf, about a film they had been hired to work on: Miles Ahead, a forthcoming Miles Davis biopic directed by and starring Don Cheadle.
The two men stood with their arms crossed and heads cocked at the same angle, reviewing a scene in which a sound cue they had designed had gone awry. The sound, originally of vintage tape decks turning, had ended up evoking a sci-fi odyssey rather than a jazz biopic. One of the problems, it was agreed, is that to the untrained ear, 1970s tape decks sound a bit like lasers.
On screen, Cheadle entered an elevator and pushed the button for the lobby. The button emitted a soft, innocuous beep. ¡°That¡¯s a good beep, Lar,¡± Lievsay muttered. ¡°Good beep.¡±
As he said so, Cheadle-as-Miles leaned against the wood-panelled elevator wall, eyes closed. Suddenly, the elevator swung open to reveal a dark room of Miles¡¯s imagination, filled only with a piano, a horn, and a spotlight. The moment was intended to feel surreal, as though you were entering Miles¡¯s mind, but as the door began to swing, a deep rumble erupted into a volley of zings and swishes ? those troublesome tape decks ? as if the scene had plunged into a battle in outer space.
Lievsay hit pause and turned to Larry, shaking his head. No good.
For research, Lievsay had spent a few months reading biographies and listening through all the recordings in the Miles Davis estate: Miles interviews, Miles in the studio, Miles in concert, Miles on the street. He briefly tried to compile a timeline of every recording Miles ever made, then gave up. The film is set in the 1970s, ¡°which is Bitches Brew Miles¡±, Lievsay explained, a period when Miles favoured improvisational rhythms and electric instruments over traditional jazz. The research had led to the idea of experimenting with recording equipment of the sort that Miles would have used. Lievsay thought that they might fit moments that called for more abstract sound design, such as when Cheadle wanted to evoke Miles¡¯s agitated mental state. ¡°He was a creature of the studio,¡± Lievsay explained, taking off thin-rimmed glasses and rubbing one eye. ¡°The sounds of his mental landscape would probably have been the sounds you¡¯d hear in a recording studio, like tape decks or the click of instruments.¡±
They had got their hands on some vintage tape decks and spent an afternoon recording the sound of them playing forward and backward, clicking and scrubbing. But when Zipf edited the sounds and played them underneath scenes from the movie, the result sounded like Battlestar Galactica, not old-fashioned music equipment. Lievsay sighed. ¡°Probably because sound editors used to use tape decks when they needed space sounds. Bet you Battlestar Galactica was tape decks.¡± He threw the noises out and started over.
It is a central principle of sound editing that people hear what they are conditioned to hear, not what they are actually hearing. The sound of rain in movies? Frying bacon. Car engines revving in a chase scene? It¡¯s partly engines, but what gives it that visceral, gut-level grist is lion roars mixed in. To be excellent, a sound editor needs not just a sharp, trained ear, but also a gift for imagining what a sound could do, what someone else might hear.
Lievsay is one of the best. He won an Academy award in 2014 for his work on Gravity. He was awarded the 2015 Career Achievement award from the Motion Picture Sound Editors society. Goodfellas, Silence of the Lambs, Do The Right Thing ? his work. He is also the only sound editor the Coen Brothers work with, which means that he is the person responsible for that gnarly wood chipper noise in Fargo, the peel of wallpaper in Barton Fink, the resonance of The Dude¡¯s bowling ball in The Big Lebowski and the absolutely chilling crinkle of Javier Bardem¡¯s gum wrapper in No Country for Old Men.
Trying to sum up what makes Lievsay special, Glenn Kiser, the head of the Dolby Institute and the former head of Skywalker Sounds, told me: ¡°What separates tremendously gifted designers comes down to taste. Skip has an unfailing sense for the right sound, and how to be simple and precise. He¡¯s not about sound by the pound.¡± Jonathan Demme, who first worked with Lievsay on The Silence of the Lambs, put it more concisely: ¡°He¡¯s a genius.¡±
Despite Lievsay¡¯s influence, you have probably never heard of him, and this is no surprise: Lievsay and his team are only a few members of the legions of people involved in film production, who go about their painstaking, essential work far from the public eye. Lievsay is not a household name, but he is famous among people who are. His expertise, fittingly, is what can¡¯t be seen ? sound, yes, but also everything else that sound is to the human mind: the way we orient ourselves in relation to spaces, to time, to each other; the way we communicate when language fails; the way our ears know, precognitively, when the dark room has someone lurking in it or when a stranger will be kind. He orchestrates the levels of human perception that most people either fail to examine or lack the ability to notice at all. His job is to make you feel things without ever knowing he was there.
The monstrous complexity of Lievsay¡¯s work ? the quest to make films sound the way the world sounds ? may not be immediately apparent. When a movie finishes shooting, it enters the labyrinthine world of post-production, in which the best takes are selected and spliced together into reels ? roughly 20-minute segments of film that are worked on and then stitched together at the end of post-production. Each reel goes through picture editing (for such things as visual continuity or colour) before being handed off to the sound supervisor, who oversees all the various elements of sound design, editing and mixing.
The distinction between these three processes is subtle: design and editing have more to do with the creation and selection of the sounds that make up each scene, and the development of a cohesive aural aesthetic for a movie. Mixing involves taking sounds created by the designers and editors and integrating them in each scene so that everything sounds ¡°natural¡± ? in other words, making sure the sound of the butterfly landing on the hood of the car isn¡¯t louder than the car backfiring. (Like some of his contemporaries, Lievsay does both sound editing and mixing.)
At the beginning of this process, editors remove the audio recordings taken during filming and break down each scene into four sonic elements: dialogue, effects, music and Foley, which is the term for everyday sounds such as squeaky shoes or cutlery jangling in a drawer. For every scene, each of these four elements needs to be built and then edited separately, and at WBNY, the New York production company Lievsay runs with fellow editor Paul Urmson, each gets its own dedicated editor. Then, Lievsay or Urmson take the team¡¯s work and layers it to make scenes that sound like the world sounds.
Consider the scene at the end of No Country For Old Men when Javier Bardem¡¯s character has a car accident. After the crunch of impact, there are a few moments of what might be mistaken for stillness. The two cars rest smoking and crumpled in the middle of a suburban intersection. Nothing moves ? but the soundscape is deceptively layered. There is the sound of engines hissing and crackling, which have been mixed to seem as near to the ear as the camera was to the cars; there is a mostly unnoticeable rustle of leaves in the trees; periodically, so faintly that almost no one would register it consciously, there is the sound of a car rolling through an intersection a block or two over, off camera; a dog barks somewhere far away. The faint sound of a breeze was taken from ambient sounds on a street like the one depicted in the scene. When Javier Bardem shoves open the car door, you hear the door handle stick for a moment before it releases. There are three distinct sounds of broken glass tinkling to the pavement from the shattered window, a small handful of thunks as he falls sideways to the ground, his laboured breathing, the chug of his boot heel finally connecting with the asphalt ? even the pads of his fingers as they scrabble along the top of the window. None of these sounds are there because some microphone picked them up. They¡¯re there because Lievsay chose them and put them there, as he did for every other sound in the film. The moment lasts about 20 seconds. No Country For Old Men is 123 minutes long.
All this requires a very particular ? and somewhat strange ? set of talents and fascinations. You need the ability not only to hear with an almost superhuman acuity but also the technical proficiency and Job-like patience to spend hours getting the sound of a kettle¡¯s hiss exactly the right length as well as the right pitch ? and not only the right pitch but the right pitch considering that the camera pans during the shot, which means that the viewer¡¯s ear will subconsciously anticipate hearing a maddeningly subtle (but critical) Doppler effect, which means that the tone the kettle makes as it boils needs to shift downward at precisely the interval that a real kettle¡¯s hiss would if you happened to walk by at that speed.
In other words, to do this work, you need to be a little unusual.
Skip Lievsay¡¯s original plan was architecture. He grew up in New Jersey and dropped out of high school to take a job as a draughtsman when his parents divorced and money ran low. For a while, he thought he would apply to architecture school but a recession in the 1970s deterred him from university ? no one was hiring architects. He moved to New York, where one day he saw the visual effects legend Douglas Trumbull give a lecture about his work on Close Encounters of the Third Kind. Lievsay was captivated by Trumbull¡¯s description of the meticulous labour that went into the famous image of strange, fast-moving cloud formations. To get the shot, Trumbull and his team loaded a giant tank full of two kinds of water ? fresh and salt ? and waited for the layers to separate before injecting diluted white paint near the dividing line before a rolling camera. The paint whooshed down through the freshwater, but as soon as it hit the saltwater it was repelled, spreading out laterally as if the pigment had hit an invisible horizon. Lievsay was thunderstruck by the combination of ingenuity, artistry, and dogged persistence. ¡°I thought, holy shit, that¡¯s like science meets a sandbox. I wanna be in that.¡±
After an internship on one low-budget film, Lievsay was hired to edit United Artists movies, as well as the prerecorded skits for Saturday Night Live. When he was 29, he worked with Martin Scorsese on After Hours. ¡°I got the job because I agreed to do it for the money they were offering and everyone else had passed on it,¡± Lievsay told me, grinning. First, he had an audition of sorts: Scorsese gave him a bit of film and said, ¡°See what you can do with that.¡± It was a clip ? later edited out of the movie ? of Griffin Dunne crawling up out of a manhole, and they needed a sound for the scraping of the manhole cover as Dunne shoved it aside. ¡°The easiest thing to do would have been to get a manhole cover and record the real thing, but in those days location recording was considered to be too hard in New York City, so I had to do it in the studio,¡± said Lievsay. ¡°I found a chunk of metal and realised that if we made some recordings with that and slowed it down that it would sound much bigger and heavier.¡± Scorsese was impressed. He called out the door to one of his production team. ¡°Hey, come in here and see what the kid did! OK, kid. Good job.¡±
Collaboration with Scorsese produced some of Lievsay¡¯s most notable early work ? The Color of Money, The Last Temptation of Christ, Cape Fear ? though the creative partnership that has defined his career is with Joel and Ethan Coen. The Coen brothers are treasured by Lievsay¡¯s tribe, in part because they begin sound design unusually early in the process ? often while still writing and shooting. ¡°The way they work is the dream,¡± WBNY¡¯s dialogue editor, Eliza Paley, told me. ¡°They understand that sound is also storytelling.¡±
The Coens also share Lievsay¡¯s sense of humour. There¡¯s a sound Lievsay loves, of a particular car driving on a Manhattan street. He recorded it early one morning many years ago when he stuck a microphone out of his apartment window to capture traffic noises. The recording tickled him because it sounds nothing like a car, but exactly like the sound of a cow mooing. He has made it a point to put the moo sound in every Coen brothers movie, for laughs. ¡°So there¡¯s a moment in True Grit, which is set before cars existed, when what you are hearing is Manhattan traffic.¡±
Lievsay wears his distinctions lightly ? he seems naturally inclined towards cheerful self-effacement. When asked about his inclusion, in 1995, on New York Magazine¡¯s 100 Smartest New Yorkers list, he snorted. ¡°I mean, I think the person named after me was Madonna, so ¡¦¡± He would rather talk about almost anything else: what he is reading (Infinite Jest), politics (once, he got in a prolonged argument about Donald Rumsfeld with Werner Herzog, a frequent collaborator), strange situations he has found himself in because of work (he has, on occasion, had to dodge the DIY meth labs that proliferate in the California desert while recording the sounds of car chases). He loves to tell stories but speaks so low that you often have to ask him to repeat himself.
Underlying Lievsay manner is his belief, firmly held, that his work is craft, not art. ¡°It¡¯s like making a piece of furniture, or building a house.¡± As such, he ? and the team he leads ? has a workmanlike quality. (After he dropped out of high school, Lievsay worked for a while as a field engineer, managing on-site operations for a long construction job.) The entire team is ? with the exception of Paley, the lone female editor ? a bunch of quietly spoken dudes in T-shirts, conspicuously easygoing, witty, and dogged in their work ethic. (Paley, for her part, possesses all of the aforementioned qualities, and at least a few T-shirts.) They work long hours and often weekends. At almost any time of any day, you can find Lievsay seated before a sound console that he designed himself. Every so often he rises to float around the office, murmuring instructions to his employees, or to go for a spin around the block with Big Dave, the chihuahua-dachsund crossbreed who presides over the couch in Lievsay¡¯s office, snoozing in a tiny sweater.
There is something very slightly unnerving about spending time around people whose powers of perception suggest the existence of an entirely different layer of reality that you are missing. The way Lievsay and his colleagues work requires an entirely different ? and, in some senses, unnatural ? way of experiencing sound. ¡°Our process reflects that each sound is important enough to deserve its own consideration,¡± Lievsay told me. ¡°Each gets edited separately and then we put them all together and see what happens.¡± This is radically unlike the way the human brain is designed to hear. We are predisposed to heed the rhythms and pitch of people talking and noises that might indicate threat. Other sounds ? like white noise ? are synaptically depressed so that the brain fires fewer responses and we automatically ¡°tune out¡±. This is how the brain converts sound into information.
Consequently, the vast majority of people walk around not hearing most of what there is to hear. Not so, for most sound editors. After spending several days in the WBNY offices, even a layperson¡¯s ears grow hypersensitive ? the rush of boiling water into a mug, the faraway drone of planes overhead, even the barely perceptible squeal of the hinges on glasses becomes nerve-jangling. ¡°You have to get really good at selective listening, at turning it on and off,¡± said Lievsay. It can be mildly excruciating to listen this hard, to hear so much. Manhattan becomes unbearable. When some of the team walk around the city, Skip¡¯s partner Paul Urmson confesses, they wear earplugs: ¡°Just to take it down 15db.¡±
On the first morning of the Miles mix, the power went out and all hell broke loose. While the editing had gone fairly smoothly ? once they did away with the laser sounds ? the first morning of mixing week was off to a rocky start: first a fuse had blown, knocking out power to all computers, movie screens, mixing consoles and coffee machines. Then, the internet went. It happened also to be the coldest day of the year. The team¡¯s assistant editor, Caleb, was dashing around the office cursing under his breath. Jonathan Demme and his poodle were in the building. He was working upstairs on his next film while Lievsay and Zipf were downstairs, rushing to get ready for the imminent arrival of Don Cheadle.
Despite the relative chaos, the building retained an odd noiselessness, even once the power returned. There was little motion and no conversation on the mixing stage, a full cinema converted to accommodate a 20ft desk holding two enormous sound consoles, each outfitted with roughly five dozen knobs and switches. The four men ? Lievsay and Zipf, the picture editor John Axelrad and Todd Kasow, the music editor ? crouched before their consoles without speaking, turning dials and making adjustments that, for the most part, only they could hear.
Lievsay pulled up a cue and played one three-second clip again and again. On screen, Cheadle lit a cigarette: the metal lighter zipped and rung; the skin of his fingers shifted on the cigarette; there was an intake of breath; paper and tobacco crackled as he inhaled, music played in the background. Lievsay rewound. Zip, ring, shift, breath, slightly more crackle, music. Lievsay rewound again. No one spoke. The real Cheadle had not yet arrived.
Sound mixes are notoriously stressful, in part because they come at the very end of a film¡¯s production. ¡°As a mixer you¡¯re the midwife to the director who is at this moment giving final birth to the film,¡± says Walter Murch, the groundbreaking editor and sound designer, known for his work on Apocalypse Now, The English Patient, and The Godfather: Parts II & III. ¡°[Mixing] is the last inch of the diving board. After this there¡¯s little that¡¯s done to the film. You have to feel where the director is sensitive and what are the unresolved questions and how can I help through sound to moderate it? There¡¯s a great deal of psychoanalytics.¡±
Directors are not the only stressed-out people who may need attending to: mixing rooms also contain picture editors under pressure to put the finishing touches on their work, producers arguing over logistics such as credit reels, actors floating through for last-minute dubbing and assistants trying hard not to get fired.
In this environment, Skip¡¯s laid-back demeanour, his nearly inaudible jokes, his uniform of T-shirts and jeans, his consummate just-a-nice-dudeness ? the Coens joke that Lievsay was part of the inspiration for Lebowski¡¯s The Dude ? has a palliative effect. ¡°To do this job,¡± Lievsay told me, leaning back in his swivel chair, ¡°you need to be the kind of person that people aren¡¯t going to mind being stuck in a room with for four to six weeks.¡± Like The Dude, Lievsay rarely gets visibly irate. His only tell, his employees advised, is his neck: when he¡¯s really fed up, he bobs his neck once or twice like a bird, as if literally trying to swallow harsh words.
By 11am, the mixing stage exploded into a volley of gunfire. Even though the crashes were coming from the elaborate network of speakers lining the walls, everyone but Zipf and Lievsay jumped. The sound was so loud that it sent the pens and spectacles lying on top of desks abuzz. Larry stopped the tape to rewind. He added a little more tectonic rumble and played it again. Even with advance warning, everyone jumped again.
It becomes clear, in moments like these, exactly how unconscious the experience of sound is, how neatly it skirts our higher reasoning to make us feel. It does not matter if you know the violence is just pretend ? make the gunshot noise loud and accurate enough and your body will believe it is real. For this reason, sound is one of the most visceral, subtle tools available to filmmakers. No need to wait to see the limp of the boy who has fallen off his bicycle to know that his ankle is broken ? a small crunching noise added to his landing will make a viewer cringe in empathy.
For the gunfire cue in Miles Ahead, the rush of revving engines and bullets was intended to cue a 20-year jump back in time, an entrance into Miles¡¯s memory. The burst of violence was brief ? maybe 15 seconds ? just long enough for an adrenaline spike before the storyline jumped back to the present day, where a cockroach was scuttling along a countertop in a quiet, sunlit room. Once he finished balancing the sounds of gunshots, Larry turned his attention to the cockroach. Each foot pattered softly, whispery but as precise as the bullets had been. The music editor heaved a great satisfied sigh over his console. ¡°Fuck,¡± he said, admiringly. Lievsay nodded in approval.
To everyone¡¯s relief, Don Cheadle proved upon arrival to be in favour of keeping the vibe calm. He arrived without entourage or announcement, unzipped his puffer jacket, shook Skip¡¯s hand, and ? after greeting everyone in the room ? took a seat on the side of the room and asked to get to work. As the mix progressed, the days settled into a kind of numbing, noisy rhythm. The men took their places each morning at nine at the same desks. The hours passed predictably: breakfast, noises, lunch, noises, 4pm coffee, noises, noises noises. The mixing theatre is windowless and clockless, and seems therefore to exist outside of time. For two-and-a-half weeks, nothing changed except the noises and occasionally the arrangement of the belongings draped over the couches. One Monday I arrived mid-morning and found it hard to discern whether the team had moved all weekend. After a few moments, comforting evidence to the contrary: Lievsay¡¯s socks, which had been black on Friday, were striped.
Even without the interpersonal stress, mixes are hard on the senses. Imagine sitting in a dark room watching a movie in four-second intervals. Repeat this until the hours stretch into days, then weeks. Life becomes a series of stuttering noises stretching into eternity, punctuated only by interruptions for someone to complain about the ¡°chunkiness¡± or ¡°creaminess¡± or ¡°washiness¡± or whatever-ness of a fly¡¯s buzz.
As work continued on Miles Ahead, sounds were compared to a stack, a field, a room, a series of colours. Noises were described as ¡°washy¡±, ¡°pingy¡±, ¡°chunky¡±, ¡°spongy¡±, ¡°roomy¡±, ¡°blatty¡± and ¡°futzy¡±. ¡°It¡¯s tough because most people aren¡¯t articulate about sound,¡± Lievsay said in his office after one particularly long day. ¡°So you¡¯re in the mixing room and you¡¯re trying to triangulate between what the director wants and the picture editor wants, and everyone¡¯s trying hard to make themselves understood and there¡¯s the desperation problem, because they¡¯re running out of time ? you¡¯re just hanging on by the skin of your teeth.¡±
The impact a tiny aural cue can have on the brain¡¯s understanding of narrative is astonishing. On the third day of the mix, Lievsay and Larry were breezing through a scene of Miles dropping in on one of his wife¡¯s dance rehearsals when Cheadle, who had been doing t¡¯ai-chi in one corner to pass the time, paused them. The scene sounded a little too dreamy. Cheadle wanted a more matter-of-fact sound. ¡°The point is that [Miles and his wife Frances] are carving a special moment out of something that¡¯s not special,¡± he said.
Lievsay nodded and fiddled for a moment. When he replayed the scene, something small but extraordinary happened. I had watched this scene somewhere between one and two dozen times but this time I noticed something I¡¯d never seen before: a young woman passing behind Frances with a stack of papers in her hand. Lievsay had given her footsteps. Without the footsteps, I¡¯d somehow never seen her; now, I saw her, and her presence ? along with a few other tweaks by Lievsay ? suggested bustling in the room, people at work, things happening outside the eye contact forged between Miles and Frances. I didn¡¯t exactly hear the difference: I just saw the scene differently.
In order for that edit to be possible, Lievsay needed the footsteps of that young woman close at hand. He needed not just any footsteps, but ones that sounded like they were made by a low high heel of roughly the sort that women would wear in the mid-1970s crossing a wooden stage. This kind of noise ? one that requires precision, but that is intended to blend in to the background ? is called Foley. (The work is named after Jack Foley, who first came up with a process for adding quotidian noises, such as footsteps, to films in the 1920s.)
When Lievsay reached for that girl¡¯s footsteps, he wasn¡¯t going back into some old library ? he was reaching into the library of Foley designed and created specifically for Cheadle¡¯s film. The Foley house, also known informally at his studio as ¡°the sound castle¡±, where these sounds are made, is in New Jersey, just 15 minutes past the place where the George Washington Bridge connects Manhattan with Fort Lee. It is not so much a castle as a warehouse crammed with more stuff than can be adequately described here. Marko Costanzo, the antic ¡°Foley artist¡± who works there, takes evident joy in giving tours of the sound stage and the treasures he stores there: a bin full of Zippo lighters from different eras; a bunch of swords (¡°from when we did Crouching Tiger Hidden Dragon¡±); barrels; bicycles; baby carriages; one area devoted to different kinds of indoor flooring and another devoted to outdoor ground cover; a pool (¡°we built it to do the sounds for the raft in Life of Pi¡±); a child¡¯s Easy-Bake oven. ¡°I beg people not to take things to the dump, but to bring them to me instead,¡± said Costanzo, grinning and spreading his arms wide.
Costanzo¡¯s job is to replicate every sound that might reasonably be produced in a film while his colleague, engineer George Lara, directs and records. Lara, tucked at one end of the warehouse in a sound booth, announces the cue to Costanzo (¡°skin on cloth¡±) and pulls up the clip for him. Costanzo watches once to rehearse, positions his two microphones to approximate the distance and reverb needed, and then does it for real, eyes locked on the screen. They work up from the easy things like ¡°hand on hair¡± (for which Costanzo, bald as an egg, has a menagerie of wigs) to the harder cues: the sound of a tiger¡¯s feet scraping wood or the sickening thwap-clunk of a gallows releasing.
Costanzo changes into shorts before recordings to ensure that the microphones won¡¯t pick up the sound of a trouser hem rubbing against his shoes. On the morning I visited, he changed while watching his first cue: a woman knitting. He carefully selected two pieces of wood from his collection, tapping them once or twice to get the right sound, and then executed the taps again in time ? with gusto ? for the recording. The gesture had the studious flourish a minor orchestral instrumentalist ? say, the triangle player ? might devote to his one entrance. Lara, for his part, seemed reasonably satisfied with the result.
If sound editors are the secret backbone of movies, this is one of their secrets. That glorious slap Cher gives Nicolas Cage in Moonstruck before yelling ¡°Snap out of it¡±? Not Cher at all. Likely as not, that was a moustachioed man standing in his socks in a warehouse in some suburb of New Jersey.
In its resting moments, the sound console that sits in the middle of Lievsay¡¯s office displays a curious screensaver. It is a slideshow of rooms: wine cellars, cathedrals, living rooms, sheds. The photos come from a program called Altiverb, developed by people who record sounds in different spaces and then calculate the reverb acting on those sounds. The reverb pattern ? what happens to noise as it moves through space to our ears ? is known as the delta. Lievsay¡¯s central mission is to find the right one for every sound, no matter how small. He lives in search of the delta.
That he is one of the best in the industry at finding it he attributes mostly to what he calls ¡°seat time¡±, or experience. ¡°The longer you work, the better you are at imagining what something should sound like.¡± At heart, the pursuit of the delta is the pursuit of the viewer¡¯s consciousness. The sound editor¡¯s question is, at its most essential: how do you experience the world? How can I imagine what it will be like to be you listening to your wife call to you from across a field, or realising that the car approaching from behind on the dark road is coming too fast? In ways we mostly do not notice, hearing is not just sound ? it is sound plus feeling, or sound plus physical sensation, thought, history, and choice of what to hear. To work on sound, then, is not simply about crafting noise ? it is about anticipating what it is to be a peculiar, particular sentient creature in the world.
It is a dramatic enterprise, but it does not look like much. On the final day of the Miles Ahead mix, Lievsay was still and silent. During the weird philosophical arguments that went on throughout the afternoon ? was the sound of that record spinning too loud? If a trumpet came in a half-second later, would it change the entire meaning of the scene? Where was this fucker supposed to be in the room when we hear him speaking off-camera? ? Lievsay rarely responded. His head bobbed only twice. It appeared, oddly, as though he was doing mostly nothing that afternoon, just clicking in slow, methodical plunks.
Five thirty arrived, the final hour before Lievsay had to catch a plane to Los Angeles, where he would start working on a documentary about Malala Yousafzai early the next morning. Slowly, Cheadle and Axelrad and the team began gathering, one by one, to stand behind Skip¡¯s chair. They looked over his shoulder anxiously, as if watching a finish line approach.
What came next was uncharacteristically theatrical for Skip. He worked until there was only one cue left, a single trumpet bleat that would mark a kind of epiphany for Miles; the film¡¯s final turn. It was first too rough, then too bleaty, then too quiet. Lievsay made an alteration. After that, it sounded too far back in the room, too reverby.
Six-thirty arrived. Lievsay clicked quietly, dragging a soundwave down on the monitor in front of him, nudging another one up, and then played the cue back again. The trumpet was in the room suddenly, plaintive and ugly and insistent and right. It was the epiphany that the film needed it to be. Lievsay nodded. ¡°That¡¯s it,¡± he said.
He stood up, shook Cheadle¡¯s hand, clapped Zipf on the shoulder, and was gone. Everyone stood around in his wake for a while, dazed and din-drunk. Zipf shook his head, as if clearing his ears. Cheadle clapped Axelrad on the shoulder. People kept looking reflexively at the screen, where the horn player was frozen mid-stride, as if to see what it was Lievsay had done to that trumpet. After a few minutes this stopped, as if in acknowledgement. The delta is not something you see, anyway.
An Argentinian court on Thursday ordered a renewed investigation into a prosecutor¡¯s accusation that former president Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner covered up the alleged involvement of Iranians in a bombing that killed 85 people.
The attack on a Jewish community center in Buenos Aires in 1994 wounded hundreds of others.
The country¡¯s top criminal tribunal accepted a request by a coalition of Argentinian Jewish associations to re-examine the charge against Fernandez, her foreign minister Hector Timerman and other officials in her government.
Prosecutor Alberto Nisman made the charge against Fernandez on 14 January 2015. He was found dead with a gunshot to the head four days later. Authorities never determined if he was killed or took his own life.
Iran has denied any connection with the attack and declined to turn over the suspects in the case.
Fernandez was president from 2007 to 2015. She has denied wrongdoing in the case.
The former president blames the accusation on what she says is the bias of judges following the orders of her successor, President Mauricio Macri, who took office in December 2015.
Santiago Kaplun, the secretary general of the delegation of Jewish organisations, welcomed the court ruling, telling the Todo Noticias cable TV channel: ¡°We are very hopeful.¡±
The ruling adds to the legal complications facing the former leader.
On Tuesday, a federal judge approved charges of illicit association and fraudulent administration against Fernandez, and two former aides: ex-planning minister Julio de Vido and former public works secretary Jose Lopez. They are accused of misusing public money by paying inflated prices for public works contracts. Fernandez also denies wrongdoing in that case.
Former New Orleans Saints player Will Smith was shot and killed Saturday after a traffic accident, and police arrested a suspect in the shooting on Sunday.
New Orleans city coroner Jeffrey C Rouse said in an emailed statement that Smith died ¡°of multiple gunshot wounds¡± after a traffic accident in the city¡¯s Lower Garden District. The former defensive end was 34 years old.
Cardell Hayes, 28, was arrested on a charge of second-degree murder in Smith¡¯s death, New Orleans Police Department spokesman Tyler Gamble said Sunday. Police said Hayes was the driver of a Humvee H2 that rear-ended Smith¡¯s Mercedes G63 at about 11.30pm on Saturday. A passenger in Hayes¡¯ vehicle was questioned and released, he said.
Gamble said the investigation was continuing. Online court records show Hayes plead guilty in 2014 to one count each of possessing an illegal weapon and possessing drug paraphernalia.
Saints¡¯ owner Tom Benson and family released a statement mourning the loss of a player who had been their No. 1 draft pick in 2004.
¡°The Saints family is hurting and devastated as it has lost a member too young and too soon,¡± the statement said.
¡°On behalf of the Smith family, we are thankful for the outpouring of support and prayers. We ask that you continue to respect the family¡¯s privacy as they grieve the loss of a devoted husband, father and friend,¡± the statement read.
NFL commissioner Roger Goodell also released a statement offering his condolences to the family.
The former defensive end was driving through an upscale part of the city called the Lower Garden District when his car was rear-ended and pushed into a Chevrolet Impala occupied by two acquaintances of Smith¡¯s, police said. The acquaintances were not injured.Police said Smith and Hayes argued and Hayes pulled out a gun, shooting Smith and Smith¡¯s wife. Racquel Smith, 33, was hit in the leg and taken to a hospital. Smith died at the scene.
Smith, a native of Queens, New York, played for Ohio State¡¯s 2002 national championship team and was a first-round draft choice by New Orleans in 2004.
He led the Saints with a career-high 13 sacks in 2009, when the club won its only Super Bowl. Smith¡¯s career sack total ranks fourth in Saints history. He had 457 career tackles, 20 forced fumbles, seven fumble recoveries and two interceptions.He last played in an NFL regular season game in 2012, finishing his career with 67 { sacks.
During the 2013 preseason, a knee injury forced him onto injured reserve. He was signed in the 2014 offseason by New England but did not make the Patriots¡¯ regular season roster.
Smith was defensive captain for much of his career, but it was also that leadership role that landed him at the center of the NFL¡¯s bounty probe in 2012. The league concluded that Smith and fellow defensive captain Jonathan Vilma helped run a locker-room pool that paid cash bonuses for heavy and even injurious hits.
Smith was initially suspended four games by Goodell, but Smith and three other implicated players successfully appealed their suspensions and were never compelled to miss games, even as Saints coach Sean Payton was suspended the entire 2012 season.
A year earlier, however, Smith did have to serve a two-game suspension that stemmed from findings back in 2008 that he and several other NFL players had used a weight-loss product called StarCaps, which contained a diuretic that had been banned by the league because it was known to mask steroid use. That suspension was enforced after legal challenges the spanned several seasons.
Off the field, Smith took an active role in trying to improve the lives of children in New Orleans. He established a foundation called, Where There¡¯s A Will, There¡¯s A Way, in 2007. Its stated mission is ¡°to motivate, educate and provide opportunities for women and children.¡±
After football, he settled in Louisiana, his wife¡¯s native state. His shooting came during the weekend of the French Quarter festival, a popular festival featuring local music and food.
Smith leaves behind his wife and three children.
15 Nov, Helmand Royal Marines Commando patrol fires "warning shots" at white Hilux. Two civilians killed, and 2 wounded, including a child.
4 Oct, Kabul Unidentified UK squad wounds non-combatant with "2 or 3 bullets" from "warning shot".
21 Oct, Kabul Unidentified UK vehicle "with a gunner on top" wounds three civilian interpreters in a private security company vehicle. "Investigation is controlled by the British. We are not able to get the complete story."
25 Oct, Kabul Vehicle fails to stop for unidentified patrol. "Warning shot" fired by British soldier "which ricocheted and struck a non-combatant".
6 Nov, Kabul Son of Afghan general killed by "warning shot" from unidentified UK company on day of brother's wedding. "There could be some demonstration ¡¦ The family will get the dead body tomorrow."
12 Mar, Helmand Ambushed troops call in gunships after soldier wounded. Claim 3 enemy killed. Bodies of 2 women and 2 children later found, plus a wounded child.
22 Oct, Helmand Soldier in British squad mentoring Afghan army kills motorcyclist for "driving at speed" towards them. "He believed the LN [local national] was a suicide bomber."
19 Nov, Helmand Soldiers from J Company, 42 Commando Royal Marines fire "warning shots" at vehicle approaching convoy. They kill a child.
29 Nov, Helmand Police patrol mentored by UK troops shoots at vehicle driven by another Afghan policeman. His daughter is shot in the leg.
4 Dec, Helmand W Company, 45 Commando Royal Marines, shoot and wound man as possible "spotter". Then discover "this was a LN not an insurgent".
24 Dec, Helmand L Company, 42 Commando Royal Marines, clearing route of IEDs, shoot at approaching vehicle. They wound occupant.
30 Dec, Helmand W Company, 45 Commando Royal Marines, fire "warning shot" at white van. They wound 12-year-old boy passenger "from a ricochet".
3 Jan, Helmand British mentors with Afghan army fire warning rifle-shot at suspicious person "which accidentally hit a LN pedestrian".
19 Jan, Helmand Y Company, 45 Commando Royal Marines, call in a Reaper drone to launch Hellfire missile on Taliban. Two children are then brought to the base with "shrapnel wounds to their abdomen".
27 Jan, Helmand W Company, 45 Commando Royal Marines, shoot at two people "watching the patrol". A man and a child receive gunshot wounds.
26 Mar, Helmand W Company, 45 Commando Royal Marines, shoot and wound motorcyclist for "observing the patrol", then discover he is mentally ill.
19 May, Helmand Gurkhas mentoring police unit call in Harrier air strike after ambush. Laser-guided bomb kills eight civilians and compound destroyed. "Compensation for relatives and the land-owner has commenced."
28 May, Helmand Patrol from A Company, 2nd Battalion The Rifles, shoots at car. Passenger Najam Nadeen "bleeding heavily" from gunshot wound. His brother, the driver, says they did not see the patrol in the dark.
30 Sept, Helmand Platoon from B Company, 4th Battalion The Rifles, call in air strike. "A LN tractor and car approached the front gate with multiple casualties. There were 2 families in the compound.The LNs are saying 7 dead."
10 Nov, Helmand Patrol listed as 1 Coy Coldstream Guards kills driver who fails to stop. "Local National received a gunshot wound to the chest."
Did Muammar Gaddafi receive his fatal wounds while attempting to escape or was he executed?
Already questions are being asked about the circumstance of Gaddafi's death, whether he died from his injuries during a Nato airstrike and subsequent gun-battle with government forces.
So what evidence is there for how Gaddafi died?
Several fragments of mobile phone footage exist showing brief snapshots of Gaddafi apparently able to use his legs after capture, Gaddafi moving his hand up to his throat and a lifeless Gaddafi after being helped into a pickup truck. While the quality is poor in all of them, it appears that in the first sequence of Gaddafi still alive he is bleeding from a wound on the left side of his head, parallel with his left eye.
In post mortem stills, taken in an ambulance after his death, several wounds are visible including a large round wound close to his left temple, a wound in the centre of his forehead and an elongated wound close to his throat. Doctors and a reporter who saw the body also describe seeing a gunshot wound to the chest although this may have been the wound close to his throat.
Doctors in the ambulance who saw him also described a gunshot wound to the head and one to the chest although it is not clear whether these were received before or after capture given evidence of an existing head injury on capture attested to by other NTC officials.
Accounts of his death by an unnamed NTC official and a fighter interviewed on television suggested he had been shot with a 9mm round "after" being taken into custody.
From the post mortem pictures it is hard to tell when the wound to the temple was delivered or by what. It is clear that Gaddafi had a head injury of some kind when captured. In most of the video fragments there is evidence of bleeding down that side of his face, soaking the shoulder of his shirt, even when pictured alive.
Close contact gunshot wounds ? often associated with execution ? typically show a different appearance. They are often star shaped and surrounded by a "tattoo" of gunpowder and other residues.
This is not apparent in what can be seen of the obvious wound to the temple. It is impossible to tell from the post mortem images so far released from the ambulance if there is an associated exit wound, but a plastic bag appears to have been placed closed to where it might be expected. So for now it is difficult to tell how he received the injury, at what range, when or in what circumstances.
There is footage of what appears to be a mob attack on Gaddafi on the ground. The difficulty with this segment is that it is not clear whether Gaddafi is alive or dead. In the other fragments that appear to show him alive he is wearing a gold coloured tunic and trousers. By the time this footage has been taken, his shirt has been removed suggesting it may be later in the sequence of clips ? perhaps after Gaddafi was already dead.
The number of victims of the London Bridge atrocity has risen to eight after police searching for a missing Frenchman recovered a body from the Thames.
Next of kin of Xavier Thomas, 45, missing since Saturday¡¯s attack, have been informed, though no formal identification has yet taken place, the Metropolitan police said.Those killed during the London Bridge attack include three French citizens, the French president said.
¡°We have had confirmation of the new death toll this morning,¡± Emmanuel Macron said on the steps of the Elysee palace. ¡°As far as French nationals are concerned, there have indeed been three fatalities and eight wounded. We are paying a heavy price in these attacks.¡±Six of those confirmed to have died have now been named by relatives.
The French foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, said one of the French citizens who had previously been unaccounted for ¡°has been identified among those who have died¡±.French media reports identified him as Sebastien Belanger, 36, who was reported missing by his girlfriend, Gerda Bennet.Another French victim, Alexandre Pigeard, 26, who was working in a French restaurant in Borough Market, has also been named by French media as having died.
Thomas, who was in London for the weekend with his girlfriend, is believed to have been thrown into the river Thames after being struck by the speeding van driven along London Bridge in the attack.The family of Sara Zelenak, 21, an au pair from Brisbane, who had been missing since being separated from friends in the chaos of the attack, has confirmed she is also among the dead.
Another Australian, Kirsty Boden, a 28-year-old nurse, died as she ran to help others during the attack. She worked as a theatre recovery nurse at Guy¡¯s hospital.¡°As she ran towards danger, in an effort to help people on the bridge, Kirsty sadly lost her life,¡± her family said in a statement.
Boden is one of four Australians said to have been caught up in the terror attack.
As the process of identifying victims continues, Spanish authorities are still awaiting news of Ignacio Echeverria. a 39-year-old missing HSBC banker. The Spanish foreign ministry has said they have no update, and are urging the British authorities to speed up the identification process.Christine Archibald, 30, a Canadian, and Londoner James McMullan, 32, were the first victims to be named by family members.On Monday the family of McMullan, who had been on a night out, said they believed he was among the victims. Although his body has not been formally identified, his sister Melanie McMullan said in a statement that his bank card had been found on a body at the scene, and that the family expected official confirmation on Wednesday.
McMullan was described by his sister as ¡°someone who put friends and family above all else¡±. She insisted that the family would not be drawn into hatred by the atrocity. ¡°While our pain will never diminish, it is important for us to carry on with our lives in direct opposition to those who would try to destroy us, and remember that hatred is the refuge of small-minded individuals, and will only breed more,¡± she said. ¡°This is not a course we will follow, despite our loss.¡±
Boden had been working in London since 2013. In a statement, her family said: ¡°Kirsty was loved and adored by her family, friends and boyfriend. She was the most outgoing, kind and generous person who loved to help people. Helping people was what she loved to do in her job as a nurse and in her daily life.
¡°As she ran towards danger, in an effort to help people on the bridge, Kirsty sadly lost her life. We are so proud of Kirsty¡¯s brave actions which demonstrate how selfless, caring and heroic she was, not only on that night, but throughout all of her life. Kirsty ? we love you and we will miss you dearly.¡±
She was a keen traveller and in a blog described herself as ¡°just your average dreamer, with a full-time job and a constant longing to go where I haven¡¯t been¡±. Recent posts were from Milan, Sofia, Lisbon and Kiev, for the 2017 Eurovision song contest. Urging others to travel, she had written: ¡°At the risk of sounding cliche, life is short and we should all use the time we have wisely,¡± The Age reported.Paying tribute, Dame Eileen Sills, the chief nurse at Guy¡¯s and St Thomas¡¯ NHS foundation trust said: ¡°Kirsty was an outstanding nurse and a hugely valued member of the staff team in Theatres Recovery, described by her colleagues as ¡®one in a million¡¯ who always went the extra mile for the patients in her care.¡±
James McMullan, from Hackney in east London, had not been seen since he stepped out of the Barrowboy and Banker pub on Borough High Street for a cigarette five minutes before the attackers crashed their van directly outside.
Melissa McMullan had posted an appeal for information about her ¡°amazing and incredibly talented big brother¡± on social media. She said he had been meeting up with school friends and had not been home or in contact since the attack. Friends had checked hospitals without success. The Londoner was about to launch an e-learning business.
Reading a statement announcing that James was believed to be among the victims after his bank card was found on one of those killed, Melissa, 30, said: ¡°From his friends who were with him on the night, they want everyone to know what a generous and caring friend he was. Words will never be able to match his essence. There will only ever be one James. Nowhere else will you find such humour and unique personality and someone who puts friends and family above all else. He was an inspiration.¡±
A Canadian victim was named by her family as Christine Archibald, from Castlegar, British Columbia. After graduating in social work from Mount Royal University in Calgary, Alberta, she had worked at a homeless shelter. Her family said: ¡°We grieve the loss of our beautiful, loving daughter and sister. She had room in her heart for everyone and believed strongly that every person was to be valued and respected.
¡°She lived this belief, working in a shelter for the homeless until she moved to Europe to be with her fiance. She would have had no understanding of the callous cruelty that caused her death. Please honour her by making your community a better place. Volunteer your time and labour or donate to a homeless shelter. Tell them Chrissy sent you.¡±
Archibald was with her fiance, Tyler Ferguson, when she died. His sister, Cassie Ferguson, told CBC News: ¡°He is broken into a million pieces. He held her and watched her die in his arms.¡±
Canada¡¯s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said he was heartbroken at the news. ¡°We grieve with the families and friends of those who have lost loved ones, and wish all those injured a speedy and full recovery,¡± he said.
¡°Londoners and people across the United Kingdom have always displayed strength and resilience in the face of adversity. We recently witnessed this after the attacks in Manchester and in the Westminster area of London. This time will be no different.¡±
Three French citizens are believed to have died. Two are confirmed killed, while police searching for a third missing man have recovered a body from the Thames. The French foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, said: ¡°It is with great sadness that I have learned that one of the French citizens, who was previously given as unaccounted for, has been identified among those who have died.¡±
Le Drian did not name the victim but French media identified him as Sebastien Belanger, 36, from Angers, a chef at the Coq d¡¯Argent restaurant in the City who friends and relatives said had been watching the Champions league final with friends in a Borough market restaurant called Boro Bistro. Belanger, who had lived in London for seven years, was reported missing by his girlfriend, Gerda Bennet, a bartender in Hoxton in the east of the city.Appealing for information online, she said: ¡°My heart is broken and I wish no one in this world could feel what I feel now.¡±
Belanger¡¯s cousin, Celine, told RTL radio that he and his friends ¡°became separated when the attackers entered the bar. They all ran in different directions to escape, and lost contact with each other¡±.
Le Parisien newspaper said it had confirmed his death late on Tuesday night, adding that his mother and brother were expected to arrive in London on Wednesday. The paper said Belanger had begun the evening in the The Barrowboy & Banker pub before moving on to the bistro.French media on Tuesday named Alexandre Pigeard, 27, from Normandy, who moved to London two-and-a-half years ago and was working on Saturday night at the Boro Bistro, as also having died.
La Manche Libre quoted residents from Pigeard¡¯s home town, Colleville-Montgomery near Caen as saying his death had been confirmed by the mayor. ¡°He was a kid who wanted to succeed, who loved life,¡± one resident told the newspaper.
The paper said he was a familiar figure in Caen, where he had worked in a number of bars before leaving for the UK. The mother of Vincent Le Berre, a French bar manager at Boro Bistro in Borough market, earlier told Le Telegramme that her son believed a colleague of his, Alexandre, had been killed at the bar.
Le Drian said on Monday he had wanted to come to London ¡°to show that France is at Britain¡¯s side. ¡°The UK has been hit for the third time in less than three months by a terrorist attack. We wanted to show our solidarity to all families of the victims and show we are all concerned by this, and to express our profound compassion.¡±
¡°At present the the toll among French citizens of the London attack is two dead and eight injured, including four in a serious condition,¡± the foreign ministry said. One French national ¡°remains missing¡±.Xavier Thomas¡¯s next of kin have been informed that the body of a man was found in the river on Tuesday night at 7.44pm near Limehouse by specialist officers from the marine police unit.Thomas, who was in London for the weekend with his girlfriend, has not been seen since Saturday night. His girlfriend, Christine Delcros, was seriously injured. Her sister, Nathalie Cros Brohan, posted online that she was on her way to London to visit Delcros in hospital. She appealed for anyone with news of Thomas to get in touch, adding: ¡°We are terribly worried.¡±
Ignacio Echeverria, 39, from Madrid, who works for HSBC in London, had apparently been skateboarding in a park with friends when he stopped to help a woman who was injured in the atrocity. His family had been asked for fingerprints for identification purposes.Australian Sara Zelenak, 21, was last seen running from the attack on London Bridge, where she became separated from friends. Her mother, Julie, who travelled to London, confirmed her death in a Facebook post saying: ¡°Sara Zelenak is confirmed dead they found her body & has DNA tests confirmed thank-you for all the overwhelming love & support from everyone.¡± Zelenak was a nanny, and was supposed to be babysitting on Saturday night but there was a last-minute change of plan.
Her mother told Australian radio station 97.3FM her daughter had been travelling in Europe since March, and was working as an au pair in London. She said her daughter had been at Westminster the day before Khalid Masood killed five in a car and knife rampage and had also planned to go to the Ariana Grande concert in Manchester, where suicide bomber Salman Abedi murdered 22 victims. ¡°Everything, she¡¯s just missed,¡± she had said.Among the 48 injured were four police officers, including a British Transport Police officer who confronted the terrorists with nothing more than a baton. Theresa May said many of the wounded had sustained life-threatening injuries, while the NHS said at least 21 people were in a critical condition.
The BTP chief constable, Paul Crowther, said he had visited his colleague in hospital and he had ¡°showed enormous courage in the face of danger, as did many others who were at the scene and rushed to help¡±.
¡°Although he is seriously unwell, he was able to recount how he faced the attackers armed only with his baton, outside London Bridge station. For an officer who only joined us less than two years ago, the bravery he showed was outstanding and makes me extremely proud,¡± he said.
A Metropolitan police officer, a rugby player based in Southwark, was off duty and having a drink with friends when he was stabbed tackling one of the three attackers. He is in a serious condition. The Met police commissioner, Cressida Dick, said: ¡°My understanding is that, without hesitation, wearing his normal clothes, he dived in and tried to assist, and he I¡¯m afraid was himself severely injured, but utterly heroic.¡±
A further two Met officers were hurt while on duty, one a plain clothes officer who received stitches to a head injury, and a uniformed officer who received an injury to his arm.
Mark Rowley, the Met police assistant commissioner, said a member of the public was shot as officers tried to neutralise the terrorists with an ¡°unprecedented¡± level of gunfire. Speaking at a press conference, Rowley said the individual was being treated in hospital but was not in a critical condition.
He said eight armed officers discharged about 50 bullets as they tried to stop the three knife-wielding attackers.
Dr Malik Ramadhan, a senior doctor at the Royal London hospital, told the Guardian the man was shot in the head but was expected to make a full recovery. ¡°We had one gunshot wound. There¡¯s a patient in this hospital who¡¯s been shot in the head; a man. He¡¯s absolutely not dying. Our expectation is that he will make a full recovery,¡± said Ramadhan, the divisional director for trauma at the hospital.
The mother of one of the victims, 23-year-old Daniel O¡¯Neill, has told of her son¡¯s experience. ¡°He just stepped outside the bar for a second and a man ran up to him and said ¡®this is for my family, this is for Islam¡¯, and stuck a knife straight in him. He¡¯s got a 7in scar going from his belly round to his back,¡± Elizabeth O¡¯Neill told reporters outside King¡¯s College hospital.
¡°The man ran away, Daniel headed back into the pub, there were shots fired, everybody was told to lie down, and then they were told to go downstairs in the bar. At this stage, Daniel¡¯s friend had put a tourniquet on him and was holding pressure there. He was brought downstairs ? parts of that he doesn¡¯t remember ? and then the police were there and brought him in their car to the hospital.¡±
O¡¯Neill said her son could talk but was in shock. ¡°These people say they are doing this in the name of God, which is an absolute joke. They are callous, they are barbaric and they are absolute cowards. We will carry on as normal,¡± she said.
London hospitals, including King¡¯s College hospital, the Royal London and St Thomas¡¯s confirmed they were among those treating the injured, though a number had now been discharged.
Geoff Ho, the Sunday Express business editor, was taken to intensive care after being stabbed in the throat when he tried to help a wounded bouncer. He was filmed being led away from the scene by a police officer, clutching his neck and with his shirt off.
According to the Mirror, he wrote on Facebook: ¡°Don¡¯t know whether it was stupid or noble to jump in and break up the fight outside the Southwark Tavern, but two a***s trying to do over the lone bouncer on the door isn¡¯t happening on my watch.¡±
His friend, Isabelle Oderberg, tweeted: ¡°We have found Geoff. He is in intensive care.¡± She told the Melbourne newspaper the Age: ¡°He is actually a martial artist and I wouldn¡¯t be surprised if he would have stood up and been counted because he¡¯s just that type of person.¡±
From his hospital bed, Ho wrote: ¡°The bastard in the Arsenal shirt came at me first. I think I got a hit in on one of them, but either he or his accomplice got me with a shot to the throat.¡±
Antonis Filis, a Greek national who works in London, is recovering in hospital after being stabbed in the kidney. Greece¡¯s state news agency said Filis, who also sustained head injuries, had been with his girlfriend in Borough Market.
According to Greek local media, Filis¡¯s parents, Giorgos and Grazia-Maria, heard the news from his girlfriend. Filis lived close to Borough Market and his father sent a message to check that he was all right. ¡°We didn¡¯t get an answer, and then a little while later we saw a call come in from his phone. A girl said: ¡®Don¡¯t worry, he is well, he has been injured,¡¯¡± Giorgos Filis told Lamia Report, a news outlet in the central Greek town.
¡°I wouldn¡¯t wish it on any parent to be faced with the feeling that we had ¡¦ he stared at death in the face ¡¦ he said they were aiming for his carotid ? with God¡¯s help and with him throwing up his hand [in front of his face], he was hit on the head. If it had been a little bit lower we don¡¯t know what would have happened.¡±
Filis required eight stitches to his head and several hours of surgery after being knifed in the kidney. His father said he was now out of danger.
Brett Freeman, from Dagenham, east London, was stabbed four times according to friend Darren Mole. Mole tweeted:Mole posted a picture of Freeman in his hospital bed.
Kim del Toro, the mother of Candice Hedge from Australia who was named as one of those hurt in the attack, told Fairfax Media that her daughter had received emergency surgery at St Thomas¡¯s hospital, and said: ¡°She is going to be fine, thank goodness.¡±
The Brisbane Courier Mail said Hedge had finished her waiting shift at Elliot¡¯s restaurant and was having a drink at the bar when a man came up behind her, grabbed her head and slashed at her throat.
Del Toro said Hedge had been at the bar with her boyfriend, Luke, when ¡°he heard some commotion out the front and went out to see what was going on¡±.
¡°He saw some men with knives coming toward them, and he ran back inside to see where Candice was.¡±
She said he had been unable to find her, and the police had yelled for everyone to stay down. He had then seen his girlfriend running towards him, holding her bleeding neck.
Del Toro said her daughter had been able to make a Skype call on Sunday morning. ¡°She couldn¡¯t speak, but I got to see her and she gave me the thumbs up, so I knew that she was OK.¡±
Hedge also posted on Facebook to reassure friends, the Sydney Morning Herald reported. She wrote: ¡°I¡¯m doing OK. Still in hospital, but all in the clear. I really can¡¯t talk. The f----- stabbed me in the neck. Don¡¯t worry too much. I love you all.¡±
In a video posted on Reddit, Morrison, from Darwin, Australia, who had a bloodstained cloth wrapped around his neck, said he had been stabbed after leaving Belushi¡¯s bar where he had been watching the Champions League final.
¡°All of a sudden this guy comes up with a knife ¡¦ I push him off. I walk into a pub and say: ¡®Someone help me, I¡¯ve been stabbed,¡¯¡± he said on the video.
Morrison¡¯s sister Katrina told the NT News the family was just happy he was safe. ¡°Yes, my brother was involved,¡± she said. ¡°We¡¯re currently sorting out his flight home.¡±
Oliver Dowling, 32, from Christchurch, New Zealand, was recovering from four hours of surgery after being stabbed in the face, neck and stomach.
According to the New Zealand Herald, his sister Freddy posted on Facebook: ¡°Doctors are very happy with how he¡¯s come out the other side. A massive thanks to the University of London hospital for their tireless efforts in helping my brother out!¡±
His girlfriend, Marie Bondeville, was also injured, she wrote, adding: ¡°Marie has been in surgery at another hospital but unfortunately we haven¡¯t been able to find out how she is due to not being immediate family.¡±
Larner, 47, from Peckham, was stabbed eight times as he fought with the trio of attackers at the Black & Blue bar in Borough Market. They shouted: ¡°This is for Allah¡± and ¡°Islam, Islam, Islam,¡± he told the Sun. He said he shouted back: ¡°Fuck you, I¡¯m Millwall,¡± before trying to punch them.
A spokesman for Spain¡¯s foreign ministry told the Associated Press that a Spanish man had been treated in hospital for wounds described as not serious.
Two German nationals were among the injured, according to Germany¡¯s interior ministry.
Six women and eight men were taken to King¡¯s College hospital in south London and one patient had since been discharged, a spokesman said. The Royal London hospital in east London was continuing to treat 12 people, Barts health NHS trust said.
A spokeswoman for Guy¡¯s and St Thomas¡¯s NHS foundation trust said it had treated nine patients at St Thomas¡¯s ? six men and three women. Five had since been discharged and four ? two men and two women ? had been admitted.
A rest centre was set up at London South Bank University where volunteers from the British Red Cross were helping those affected, Southwark council said.
Of the 48 people admitted to five London hospitals following the attack, 32 still remained, NHS England said on Tuesday. The number of those in a critical condition fell to 15 from 18 on Monday, and 21 initially.
? 13 people, including a gunman, are dead after a shooting at the US navy yard in Washington DC. The city's mayor, Vincent Gray, confirmed the death toll at a press conference on Monday afternoon. Gray said there is "no known motive at this stage". He said officials "do not have any reason at this stage to suspect terrorism".
? The gunman has been identified as Aaron Alexis, a 34-year-old military contractor. The FBI appealed for people to come forward with details on Alexis, who had recently been living in Fort Worth, Texas. "No piece of information is too small. We are looking to learn everything we can about his movements and his associates," said assistant Valerie Parlave.
? The FBI are still hunting a potential second suspect in the shooting, authorities said. Authorities said they were trying to locate a man seen at the navy yard this morning "to determine what if any involvement he may have had". The man is described as a black male wearing an olive military?style uniform. He is between 40 and 50-years-old, approximately 5'10" with grey sideburns, according to police.
? Authorities are yet to identify any of those killed. A police officer was among those injured. He suffered injuries to "bones and blood vessels in his legs" and was in surgery on Monday afternoon, a spokeswoman from MedStar Washington Hospital Center said. The other two MedStar patients were female. One had been shot in her shoulder, the other in her head and hand. All were expected to survive.
? Alexis was remembered as a "sweet" man by customers at a thai restaurant where he worked in Fort Worth. But police in Seattle and Texas said he had been arrested twice in recent years for gun violations. In Seattle in 2004 he shot out the tyres of a vehicle in an "anger-fuelled blackout" police said. He had also been arrested in Texas after shooting a gun through the ceiling of his apartment.
? President Obama said the victims had faced "unimaginable violence" and offered his condolences to their families.?"We will honour their service to the nation we helped to make great," Obama said. "Obviously we will investigate thoroughly what has happened, as we have so many of these shootings that has happened sadly." The president issued a proclamation which ordered for flags to be lowered to half-staff at all public buildings and military posts.
Farc rebels in Colombia have killed a provincial governor hours after kidnapping him in a bold commando raid, marking a return of political kidnaps.
Clad in his pyjamas, Luis Francisco Cuellar was taken from his home in Florencia, capital of Caqueta province, on Monday night after at least eight suspected members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Farc) blasted the door down with explosives, according to local officials.
His body was found hours later in a rural area. President Alvaro Uribe said last night that Cuellar's throat had been slit.
The acting Caqueta governor, Patricia Vega, told local radio that the government had confirmed Cuellar's body was found near a vehicle abandoned by the commando squad. "Unfortunately we have to accept this painful reality," Vega said. The Farc has yet to issue a statement.
Officials said information from peasants led troops to the body after Uribe had offered a $500,000 (¡Ì313,000) reward for information. Uribe's father was killed in a botched kidnapping in 1982.
Troops combed jungles and mountains of the region throughout Tuesday, searching for Cuellar and his abductors.
Police discovered the charred remains of the pick-up truck used in the abduction 20 minutes outside the city. Nine explosive charges were found near the truck, presumably to slow the chase.
Cuellar's family said that he had been under threat, while Silva said that the authorities had received indications that Farc planned an attack. Caqueta, a region covered by a mix of cattle ranches and jungle, has been racked by violence and kidnappings for decades.
Cuellar himself had been held for ransom on four previous occasions.
Caqueta was also where the French-Colombian presidential candidate, Ingrid Betancourt, was kidnapped in 2002 as part high-profile abductions the rebels had hoped to use to negotiate with the government. She and 14 other prize hostages were rescued in July 2008 in a bold intelligence operation called Operation Checkmate.
Kidnappings have dropped sharply from an all-time high in 2001 of 3,029 to 172 in the first 10 months of 2009 under the hardline "democratic security" policies of the Uribe government, nearly doubling the size of Colombia's military and benefiting from $700m in annual US military aid.
Through a series of unilateral releases, bold escapes and Operation Checkmate, the Farc is left holding 24 soldiers and police officers as hostages.
The group had said it was preparing to release two of the soldiers and the body of a third now dead, possibly before the new year. But it was unclear whether those efforts would continue, since Uribe said that he had ordered his generals to rescue all the hostages.
"Who can believe in those bandits? Let's not wait for acts of generosity from terrorists," he said. But families of the 24 hostages asked the president to reconsider his order for a military rescue, fearing for the lives of their loved ones.
Marleny Orjuela, the leader of an organisation that groups the families, noted that the rebels were under orders to kill their hostages if troops closed in. "We don't want them [our hostages] wrapped in a flag," she said.
The Farc once boasted more than 20,000 fighters, and has experienced a series of setbacks over the past few years but some analysts warn that the guerrillas are regrouping and that Colombia could see an upsurge in rebel attacks.
The alarm was raised just after 4.40am, when guests at Cocos hotel in Antigua were woken by the sound of gunshots.
When police arrived 20 minutes later, they were directed by hotel security to one of the luxury resort's 19 hilltop cottages where they found Catherine Mullany, a doctor from south Wales, with a fatal gunshot wound to the head.
Her husband of two weeks, Ben, was lying nearby having been shot once in the neck. It was to have been the last day of their honeymoon.
As Mrs Mullany's family described their horror at her death, the island's authorities said her newlywed husband was in a critical condition, and that they had set up army patrols and cancelled all police leave in attempting to catch those responsible.
In a joint statement issued last night, the parents of the two Britons said they were "deeply shocked and devastated at the recent events in Antigua, and are struggling to comprehend what has happened to Ben and Catherine".
Earlier, Mrs Mullany's uncle, Gareth Jones, spoke about the tragedy, saying he had visited Catherine's parents, David and Rachel Bowen, soon after they learned about his niece's death.
"David and my sister Rachel only learned of what has happened this morning themselves," said Jones, of Rhos, in south Wales. "They are still surrounded by wedding photographs at the moment, and the tragedy is that my niece had not even seen them yet. To be honest, we are all stunned. This is so tragic."
He said the family were still unclear about exactly what had happened to the couple. "I don't know the full details, but when I spoke with my sister this morning she was very, very shaken. I am not quite sure of the circumstances but it seems that they have been shot in a robbery. Ben is still ill. He was shot in the neck and apparently his life is in the balance."
The couple, who had been due to fly back to the UK yesterday at the end of a two-week honeymoon, were asleep when at least one gunman broke into their apartment overlooking the sea, in what detectives believe was an attempted robbery. The alarm was raised just before sunrise by other holidaymakers at the resort in the south-west of the island.
According to the police, their attacker had penetrated the hotel's security system, which includes a perimeter fence, security lighting, CCTV and motion sensors, as well as three unarmed security guards who were on patrol. Ten other guests have been relocated.
The police investigation was under way last night as details began to emerge about the couple from friends and colleagues in Wales, and the minister who married them earlier this month.
Mrs Mullany, 31, recently qualified as a paediatrician after studying at Morriston hospital, Swansea, and was working at Singleton hospital, also in Swansea. Mr Mullany, also 31, worked as a physiotherapist in the same area.
She grew up on a farm and left to train in the Charing Cross and Westminster Medical School in London, returning to the Welsh countryside after qualifying in 2002. She and Ben lived just half a mile away from her family home, in a terraced house in Rhos.
The couple were married at the 12th-century St John the Evangelist church in Cilybebyll. They had held their reception at the Cilybebyll Plas farm estate, belonging to her parents David and Rachel.
Last night medics in Swansea paid tribute to Mrs Mullany, a hard-working and respected colleague.
Paul Williams, the trust's chief executive, said: "Staff at the trust are shocked and devastated by Catherine's tragic death. She was a popular, talented and caring young doctor with a wonderful career ahead of her. Our sincere condolences go out to her family, and we are all praying that her husband makes a full recovery."
Mike Cosgrove, paediatric consultant and clinical director, confirmed they had been expecting Catherine back from her honeymoon yesterday.
He said: "Instead we heard this terrible news. We are all completely devastated. She was an excellent doctor and a lovely person, and an extremely popular member of staff. She had so looked forward to her wedding; she had talked about it for months. Nobody can believe what has happened."
The island's tourism minister, Harold Lovell, told the Guardian the authorities were doing everything they could to catch the killer. "Soldiers will be patrolling with police, and patrolling the island as a whole. This is something that we want to do as a government to make sure that people feel safe. Generally we are in a heightened state of alertness and we have to make sure that there is no repeat of this incident."
All police officers on annual leave have been recalled from work to assist with the investigation, he added.
"We depend heavily on tourism and therefore it's very important that all our visitors feel safe. Something like this - which is very rare - sends shockwaves across the island."
The Antiguan police commissioner, Gary Nelson, a former Canadian officer drafted in this year to reform the island's force, told reporters that officers from a special taskforce for serious crime would lead the investigation. He said the authorities had questioned several suspects, but had no one in custody. Police sniffer dogs would be searching the shrubbery around the luxury hotel in an attempt to pick up clues.
The Antigua Sun newspaper reported that the attack on the couple was the "culmination" of an apparent crime spree over the weekend, during which at least two people were shot by masked gunmen.
Nelson, who recently arrived at the force with three officers of the Canadian Mounties, tasked with rooting out corruption, raised concern about firearm-related crimes shortly after his appointment.
"There's a lot of firearms out there and I'm concerned for my officers' safety," he said. "You can imagine how difficult it would be to go out to where shots are being fired and you don't have a weapon."
Lynne Morris, a spokeswoman for the hotel, said all the staff were cooperating with the police to try to catch whoever was responsible.
"Our thoughts are currently with the families of the couple concerned."
With its white sands and turquoise waters, Antigua conforms to the holiday brochure ideal. About 96,000 UK visitors go to the island each year to the all-inclusive resorts built around the island's 365 beaches, or seek a more private experience at smaller retreats such as Cocos. But murders - 10 so far this year - and violence have cast a shadow over the island's reputation as a safe destination and forced the former British colony to rethink its methods of tackling crime. Earlier this year, the government installed new police leadership of the Antigua and Barbuda force after 19 murders reported in 2007, up from an annual average of 6.9. (The population is about 85,000). Although none of last year's victims were foreigners, there was a rise in the number of attacks on visitors, prompting the Foreign and Commonwealth Office to issue new travel advice, including avoiding isolated areas, such as beaches, after dark. In March, four senior officers from the Canadian Mounties arrived, and one of Commissioner Gary Nelson's first priorities was to equip the 550-strong force with weapons, new vehicles and better equipment. It marked the end of British-style policing without guns in a nation that gained its independence from London in 1981.
¡¤ This article was amended on July 29 2008 to remove quotes from a priest which were made to parishioners and not directly to an agency reporter.
Late in the afternoon of 22 May 2006, Rohnell Robinson and his partner got a call from one of their associates. Investigators believe that a rival gunman, who had shot at them before, had been spotted at the Hilltop Mall in Richmond, California. As a leader of the group at the centre of the worst gun violence the city had ever seen, Robinson was known for his readiness to go after his enemies. In the words of one officer, he was a ¡°serial killer¡±.
The target, Brian Jones, pulled out of the mall parking lot in his car, according to court records. Moments later, Robinson¡¯s car rolled up alongside him. A volley of shots missed Jones, but LaQuisha Turner, his 17-year-old girlfriend, was hit in the face and neck. The injury left her paralysed from the neck down and unable to breathe without a ventilator. Over the next three months, a retaliatory cycle played out that resulted in as many as a dozen murders. The following year, the feud between two warring groups, Deep C, based in Central Richmond, and Project Trojans, from North Richmond, led to more than 20 killings.
City officials were desperate to stem the violence, and the groundwork was laid for an experimental programme that would focus on mentoring the young men most likely to kill or be killed. Set up in 2007 and primarily staffed by ex-convicts, the Office of Neighbourhood Safety (ONS) pioneered an unusual approach: it would provide men who had gun crime convictions with incentives to stop shooting. At first, ONS gave them social services referrals and life-skills training to find jobs and earn degrees. Three years later, and more controversially, it offered them a monthly cash stipend and supervised trips outside Richmond.
The year ONS was founded, Richmond, which lies north of Berkeley in the East Bay, across the water from San Francisco, was the ninth-most-dangerous city in the United States, with 47 murders among its 106,000 residents ? more than 11 times the murder rate of New York City. In 2014, the number dropped to 11. This was the lowest on record since 1971. (The total rose again in 2015, up to 20.) Murder rates have declined nationwide over the past two decades, but the 77% drop in Richmond is a statistical outlier. Over the same 2007-14 period, homicides in Oakland and New York City fell by about a third.
The success of what soon became known as the ¡°Richmond model¡± has generated a certain amount of media hype, and attracted the interest of other communities struggling with gun violence. Few people dispute that the ONS has made an impact on the streets where it started. But the notion that a successful publicly funded programme like this could one day persuade the government to attempt something similar on a much larger scale was bound to be unpopular in certain quarters.
Gun violence is the result of multiple forces coming together. Though it is possible to make a causal link between, say, the availability of firearms and deaths by shooting, when the number of deaths goes down, it is harder to identify a single reason. The positive influence ex-convicts may wield over the people pulling the triggers is hard to prove. So how much responsibility can the programme rightfully claim for Richmond¡¯s turnaround?
Rohnell Robinson, now 30, spent two years in jail, and has been out since 2009. On a cold morning in February 2014, ONS staff member Sam Vaughn drove me and Robinson through the Iron Triangle, a low-income neighbourhood bordered by two sets of train tracks. Billboards for Chevron, the area¡¯s largest employer, alternated with signs that threatened jail time for buying a gun on behalf of anyone without a licence. Corner liquor stores were open, and little else. Bernice¡¯s Chicken Spot, once a favourite haunt of Robinson¡¯s, was boarded up. So was his grandmother¡¯s house. A police car idled on a corner, ¡°just waiting¡±, Robinson said, ¡°for something to happen¡±.
On block after block, residential windows were cloaked in sheets and front yards sealed off by wire fencing. The pavements were empty. As we passed the Barretts, a gated apartment complex, Robinson reminisced about how it used to be possible to ¡°chill and get away from everything¡± there, back when shootouts with North Richmond sometimes happened three or four times in a single day.
¡°This is where I¡¯m cool,¡± Robinson said, scanning the street. ¡°Deep Central, my comfort zone.¡± He sat low in the passenger seat, despite the car¡¯s tinted glass; strict laws prohibit him from returning home to Central Richmond and associating with anyone considered a gang member in the neighbourhood.
In the wake of the LaQuisha Turner shooting, the state attorney general¡¯s office launched an investigation into Deep C that culminated in a November 2008 sweep by local and federal officers. Eighteen members were arrested, and police confiscated cash, drugs and automatic weapons. A female associate employed as a juvenile counsellor with the city parks and recreation department was found with a kilo of cocaine and a MAC-11 rifle. By then, Robinson was already in custody.
One of the attempted murder charges against Robinson was dropped, owing to lack of evidence, but a gun possession charge stuck, and he was sentenced to five years in prison.
Although he accepted the charge against him in order to get out of jail, Robinson denies that he was part of a gang. By his account, he never shared his drug earnings with anyone, never donned colours or threw hand signs, and was never ¡°jumped in¡± ? beaten up by a group to gain initiation. That kind of ¡°Bloods and Crips stuff was in LA¡±, he said. What mattered in Richmond was where you grew up and who your friends were. If there was a problem, you looked out for your partners, ¡°like someone takes care of their family¡±.
Four years ago, when he broke probation rules in order to take his four-year-old nephew to a playground in Central Richmond, someone spotted him and tipped off the police, who swept in and cuffed him in front of the boy. Some of the arresting officers had seen him just the day before, at a truancy programme where he was counselling young people as part of his ONS fellowship.
¡°It doesn¡¯t make any sense,¡± Vaughn said. ¡°You want a young man to be responsible to his community and his family, to make up for their mistakes.¡±
Robinson sighed. ¡°My name just gets me in trouble.¡±
¡°I think they believe he doesn¡¯t deserve anything better due to what he did prior,¡± Vaughn reflected. He looked at me in the rearview mirror, but the message was for Robinson. ¡°They think, ¡®If we had that evidence, we could put him in jail forever, so let¡¯s make his life as hard as we can.¡¯ So as far as revenge and retaliation, they¡¯re doing the exact same thing these young men are doing.¡±
Vaughn, 39, speaks from experience. A former cocaine dealer who hustled on the streets of North Richmond, a square-mile tract of derelict homes and projects, he spent 10 years in prison (seven in San Quentin) for pistol whipping a man almost to death. In prison, men he had looked up to on the street challenged him to stop wasting time. So Vaughn joined men¡¯s groups, worked at the church, and talked to the troubled youths who came to visit the prison as part of a programme. While incarcerated, he earned a degree and, less than a year after his release, in 2008, he was hired by Richmond¡¯s ONS to cultivate relationships with young offenders. His criminal history gave him credibility with his charges; he could be the model for them that he had never found for himself. ¡°I decided that I¡¯m going to live for them,¡± he told me.
Robinson first heard about the ONS from his mother while he was in prison. Though qualified to take part in the programme, he initially balked, worrying that his former associates would consider any link to the authorities tantamount to snitching. After talking to ONS staff, he changed his mind: they told him they did not share information with the police. In mid-2011, he accepted an invitation to join a pilot ONS programme.
Vaughn and Robinson got to know each other on an ONS trip to Dallas. Both men are Dallas Cowboys fans, and they visited the team¡¯s new stadium together. Robinson told me that Vaughn¡¯s advice helped him adapt to life after jail. Vaughn called regularly, and reliably replied to text messages. Woman trouble, finding an apartment, paying a phone bill ? nothing was too mundane for his attention. The men¡¯s mutual respect evolved into a friendship. ¡°I¡¯m not telling him how he should live his life,¡± Vaughn said. ¡°I¡¯m just giving him some options.¡±
Fifteen months into his fellowship, Robinson was charged with credit card fraud. He had got involved in a scheme purchasing stolen credit card numbers from a third party in order to buy Target gift cards and max them out. Vaughn advised him to turn himself in, which he did, then wrote a letter to the judge outlining his progress in the programme. Robinson did not lose his place in the fellowship, in spite of this and other probation violations.
¡°They expect you to give up on them, and we refuse to do that,¡± Vaughn said.
The ONS headquarters sits on the third floor of a brick building that was once a jail. You have to knock to get inside, as the wrong mix of people could get ugly. When I visited in the spring of 2014 to meet the director, DeVone Boggan, the lounge table was stacked with copies of Sports Illustrated and Black Entrepreneur. A sign taped to a wall read: ¡°I Support DeVone Boggan and The ONS.¡±
Boggan, who is 49, wore a houndstooth hat tilted over his piercing blue eyes. He had been working at a consulting firm specialising in youth mentoring in Oakland, 12 miles away, before he was hired to advise Richmond¡¯s violence prevention department. Richmond officials had been spending millions on violence prevention programmes that did not produce results. It did not take Boggan long to see that trust in law enforcement was low and community services were poor. He became convinced that the only way the city would be able to combat the violence was through an agency not associated with law enforcement.
Boggan launched the Office of Neighbourhood Safety in 2007, with a small staff of outreach workers, all but one of them ex-convicts. They focused their efforts on Richmond¡¯s Central district, less than five square miles in size. More than half of the 47 killings the previous year were in this area. Just three firearms-related homicides were recorded in the same area a year later; the conflict was now concentrated in the sprawling Southside, where a patchwork of cliques affiliated with the Project Trojans and Deep C fought. The shift suggested that focused, consistent attention worked.
But the next year, the ONS¡¯s staff of four ¡°change agents¡±, as they are called, was stretched thin trying to cover both the central and southern districts, and the death toll surged to 45. At a meeting with law enforcement officials, Boggan was stunned to learn that some 70% of the 45 homicides and 200-plus firearm assaults in 2009 were suspected of having been committed by just 17 people. He reckoned that if the perpetrators could somehow be engaged directly and intensely, in a spirit of partnership, gun violence would plummet.
ONS agents spent hours in the neighbourhoods most affected by gun violence. They played dominoes or basketball, and talked to people. The information they collected was used to develop a focus group of 50 candidates. More ¡°touches¡± were made with the prospects until rapport was built, and they would be offered a spot in the 18-month, voluntary Operation Peacemaker Fellowship.
To win the first recruits over and keep them coming back, Boggan knew he had to impress them. On arriving at the city manager¡¯s conference room, the candidates were given a sit-down lunch; every place setting had a plaque on which the guest¡¯s name was engraved. Dressed in a pinstripe suit, Boggan made his pitch: if the city was going to live in peace, he said, it would have to come through the men in that room. If they agreed to participate in the fellowship, which included drawing up a ¡°life map¡± detailing career and family goals, he told them the $1,000 cheque they received at the end of the meeting would be just the beginning. Four of the men invited to this meeting had refused straight off; they flashed guns under their belts and announced that the police would have to earn their pay. But the rest agreed to join.
In a city with scant economic opportunities for law-abiding people, ONS was criticised for rewarding criminals with taxpayers¡¯ money, or ¡°paying for peace¡±. Courtland ¡°Corky¡± Booze, a former member of the city council, argued that more deserving ex-convicts could be bypassed for not being dangerous enough, adding that the ONS had not been transparent in showing how it spends its money. Another community leader complained to me that the programme was spending too much on lavish trips in which the ratio of staff to fellows was about equal.
Boggan explained that although ONS received $1.2 million from the city for its operating budget in 2014, the money for the stipend and travel comes exclusively from private donors. Fellows are eligible for payment and travel privileges only after six months, and to earn the full $1,000 payment each month thereafter, they must fulfil the goals on their life map. Fewer than half of programme fellows have received the full amount, and Boggan has cut a lot of cheques made out for a single dollar. He added that the money given to the fellows is a pittance compared with what Richmond police department must pay for overtime, or what the city pays for the cost of a criminal trial, or medevac helicopter rides to take shooting victims to hospitals.
The programme¡¯s record is remarkable: of the 68 fellows who have taken part so far, 64 are still alive, and Boggan asserts that it is a result of better decision-making on the part of the participants. ¡°Our theory of change is simple,¡± he said. ¡°I want them to desire to live.¡±
Nearly 10 months after Boggan started the ONS, his younger brother Dhanthan, then 32, was shot dead in Michigan. Boggan went home for the funeral. His brother¡¯s friends told him they knew who did it and asked Boggan if they should retaliate. He told them that the police would handle it. Yet he found the officers helpless, unable to answer basic questions. At the memorial service, the man who was rumoured to have shot his brother turned up and offered condolences. Boggan was enraged. He advanced his return flight, knowing that if he didn¡¯t, he might do something he would regret. ¡°I¡¯m the neighbourhood safety director with all the abilities to know better, and I¡¯m feeling this way,¡± he recalled, ¡°telling myself on the flight, ¡®You could have done something. You could have done something.¡¯¡±
Richmond, with its five oil refineries and three chemical plants, sits on the east side of the bay, its industry-heavy economy mostly impervious to the tech boom in San Francisco. Chimneys and knots of petroleum piping punctuate the skyline. Local activists say that steady pollution from the Chevron refinery accelerated an exodus of the city¡¯s once-sizeable middle class and kept would-be investors away, leaving a majority black and Latino population. Industrial accidents have plagued the community, notably a 2012 refinery fire that sent more than 15,000 area residents to medical centres with respiratory ailments in a single afternoon. Child hospitalisation rates are nearly twice the state average.
But the tough circumstances have attracted ambitious and dedicated politicians. In 2006, Green party progressives took over the city council and have since enacted policies more radical than anything in famously liberal Berkeley ? including a compulsory purchase campaign to bail out homeowners and forgive debt, and a ¡°ban the box¡± ordinance that forbids employers from requiring job applicants to reveal their criminal histories. The city also hired Chris Magnus, an openly gay police chief from North Dakota, who helped to reform the police force (he departed for Tuscon, Arizona late last year). ¡°Richmond to me is a story of pragmatism,¡± said Barry Krisberg, a criminologist at the University of California in Berkeley. ¡°This idea that we¡¯re going to step away from a purely ideological, moralistic approach to try new things and see what works.¡±
Krisberg told me that Richmond¡¯s worst cycles of violence, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, then again in the mid-2000s, coincided with a deluge of crack cocaine on the streets. The surge a decade ago was compounded by cuts in state budgets that resulted in mass prisoner releases and a shortfall in funding for parole and re-entry programmes. Lifelong criminals with no prospects of legitimate work went back to making a living in the drug trade while police tried, without success, according to Krisberg, ¡°to arrest their way out of the problem¡±.
As with other cities across the country, there have been many reasons for the decline in violent crime, Krisberg said. Gentrifiers and working-class immigrants attracted by some of the lowest rents in the Bay Area have had a generally restorative effect. More money is being spent to upgrade schools and after-school programmes; playgrounds have fresh coats of paint. The chief of police has also taken steps to win local trust by orienting his force towards community policing. Magnus instated a gun buy-back programme that incentivised people to trade in weapons for gift cards, and gave officers more regular patrol beats, dispensing with aggressive street sweeps and multiple arrests. ONS¡¯s role in the reduction of violence is difficult to quantify, but in July 2015, the National Council on Crime & Delinquency published a long-term study of the programme concluding that it appears to be working.
¡°Most social service programmes do not count outcomes such as mortality or injury,¡± the report acknowledged, but ¡°using these measures is paramount for an effort designed to reduce lethal violence.¡± Still, the NCCD hedged: ¡°It is impossible to disentangle the ONS approach from other concurrent city-wide violence reduction interventions.¡±
For ONS detractors, the infamous ¡°City Hall Brawl¡± was evidence that the programme¡¯s grip on its charges was tenuous. On 14 October 2011, members of two rival groups showed up to collect their stipends at the same time. After trading insults in the parking lots, they went to the ONS office , where only administrative staff were present, and a melee broke out. Local and national media picked up the story after a police report was leaked that included the allegation from a responding officer that ONS staff had impeded the investigation. The timing of the leaks underscored the aversion some within the police department felt, and continue to feel, toward the ONS. No charges were brought.
Police officers involved in the event were reluctant to speak about it. But Detective Matt Anderson acknowledged that residual tensions from the incident have not entirely subsided in the department. He added that there has never been any formal training inside the department about the particular nature of the ONS¡¯s work: ¡°I think it¡¯s all a misunderstanding.¡±
For his part, Booze, the former councilman, refuses to let the City Hall incident go. ¡°What if one of the men had drawn a gun and accidentally shot a girl,¡± he exclaimed when we met at Casper¡¯s Hot Dog stand, opposite City Hall. ¡°Maybe [the ONS is] doing something, they are talking to people,¡± he conceded. But its strategies still rankled. ¡°I¡¯ve said it a thousand times: I¡¯m a little upset about having to pay people to stop shooting each other. Because in the community I come from, if you give someone the opportunity to take advantage of you, they will.¡±
Yet there is evidence that this is not the case. Research by GiveWell, an American non-profit organisation that evaluates the cost-effectiveness of charities, suggests that a little money can have a disproportionate impact on people living in dire circumstances. In a survey of hundreds of charities, they found direct cash transfers ¡°have the strongest track record¡± for most interventions.
Of all the perks offered by the ONS programme, trips outside Richmond are the most coveted. With funding from private foundations such as the California Endowment and Kaiser Permanente, and the California Wellness Foundation, the ONS has taken fellows on all-expense paid journeys to New York and Washington DC, and as far as Dubai and South Africa. Fellows are treated to steak dinners and four-star hotels, and given access to professional athletes and politicians on Capitol Hill. There is just one caveat: they must agree to travel with a rival.
In May 2014, Vaughn let me tag along on a day trip to Marin County with Robinson and Rasheed Shepherd, a former fellow from the Southside who was once known for wielding an outsized Desert Eagle pistol. The first time the rivals had travelled together, to Texas for the evangelical preacher TD Jakes¡¯ ManPower conference, neither wanted to sit in the front seat for fear of having the other behind him. On the drive to the airport, Vaughn had thought, ¡°This a huge mistake¡±. A conversation about football relieved some of the pressure, but it was not until they were on the plane that they gave up their posturing, too airsick to care. Seventeen hundred miles from Richmond, they realised they had more in common than not. ¡°We were having fun, and it was like, damn, this guy isn¡¯t that bad ? he¡¯s cool,¡± Robinson said.
In Marin, the plan was to go horse riding. Robinson led, yanking the reins and digging his heels. In the rear, Shepherd worried aloud that he didn¡¯t want to hurt the animal. When we stopped for lunch at Point Reyes Station, Robinson excused himself to call his girlfriend, to whom he marvelled that a place so serene was no more than an hour¡¯s drive from Richmond. Our final destination was Drake¡¯s Bay, where we sampled the oysters. I bought a half-dozen and clumsily demonstrated how to open them. Robinson looked on as Shepherd, cringing, slurped one down.
It was hard to believe that there had been a time when the mere sight of each other could have prompted them to draw their guns. ¡°We¡¯re talking ambulance and a fatal situation,¡± Robinson said. ¡°Survival of the fittest,¡± Shepherd agreed. I asked if they considered themselves friends now. They hesitated, each waiting for the other to speak. More like ¡°associates¡±, Robinson started, with a ¡°different type of understanding¡±.
¡°Just because we get along doesn¡¯t mean his other 10 friends are gonna be cool with me,¡± Shepherd said. Each said they had caught flak for travelling with people from the wrong part of town, although, Robinson said: ¡°The same folks will turn around later and go, ¡®Yo, how can I get on one of those trips?¡¯¡±
Vaughn and I sat by ourselves for a while at a picnic table, and he informed me that the decision to pair Robinson and Shepherd had been strategic; they each had status on the street, and a rapprochement could ease the tension between their groups. When ONS first proposed that the two men travel together, Vaughn promised them that although they would probably feel uncomfortable, they would never be unsafe. This was their six or seventh trip, and ¡°they no longer see themselves locked in war¡±, Vaughn said.
The light was starting to fade. In front of us, Robinson and Shepherd were standing together at the water¡¯s edge, skipping oyster shells.
By the end of 2014, Richmond had recorded the lowest murder rate in the city¡¯s history. At an annual community memorial for homicide victims, held on the steps of the library, the outgoing mayor, Gayle McLaughlin, declared that Richmond¡¯s ¡°old reputation is dying off¡± and commended the ONS for its work with the city¡¯s youth. When it was Boggan¡¯s turn to speak, he thanked the young men ¡°historically responsible for gun violence¡± for making better decisions about how they ¡°navigate everyday conflicts¡±.
Nevertheless, the new year began badly: on the evening of 13 January, 23-year-old Sirmonte ¡°Sirdy¡± Bernstine, a promising rapper from a Richmond family well-known to law enforcement, was killed in a triple shooting in the Southside Crescent Park apartments. Within a week, 10 people were arrested, eight of them on gun possession charges, as police sought to pre-empt retaliation that was being threatened on Facebook and Instagram. Two weeks later, Keyon Wilson, 21, and Lamarea Mims, 23, brothers from Crescent Park, were shot dead in Vallejo in the space of eight hours. As usual, Vaughn and the ONS staff went to the funeral.
Robinson had known Sirdy since he was a boy. Several weeks before his death, they hung out in the recording studio as Sirdy finished his album. ¡°Man, I love him ? what I don¡¯t love is his decision-making,¡± Robinson told me in April. ¡°But I can¡¯t judge him, ¡¯cause that was me.¡± In the days after the shooting, Robinson knew that people around Richmond were speculating on whether or not he might seek revenge. His stress increased after the Crescent Park brothers were killed because he had been on good terms with their clique. Now both sides were potential liabilities: if he showed solidarity with one, the other might come at him. He decamped to Los Angeles for a few days to let the situation cool down.
When he returned, we had lunch at his favourite Vietnamese restaurant. The place was on the border between Central and Southside, the kind of spot where you might run into someone you don¡¯t want to see. In white jeans and a sweatshirt, with diamond studs in his ears, Robinson sat facing the door, more out of habit than nerves.
Hustling ran in the family, Robinson told me. His grandfather was a prominent coke dealer in the 1980s, whose arrest, during which Robinson was in the car, was featured in a documentary. His stepfather cut him in on his first drug deal when he was 12, and he was caught by police at 14. In his teens, he and a group of friends protected a block in the heart of the Iron Triangle against a group of men twice their age. He remembered the early days fondly. Marijuana and cocaine were the main products. Robinson could make as much as $1,000 a day. Robberies grew with profits, and he started carrying a gun when he was in high school. And yet, barring the occasional street fight, he said, gun violence was rare.
The feuding started with a car accident. A man from North Richmond collided with a man from Central as he pulled out of a driveway. He agreed to pay for damages, but later reneged and was killed. Before long, a personal dispute erupted into a neighbourhood conflict. ¡°It¡¯s been on ever since,¡± Robinson said. At one funeral, a man was shot in the face.
One day in March 2005, Robinson¡¯s closest friend, 18-year-old Byron Mott, was shot. The week before, he had been cheering Robinson on the football field. The incident was a turning point, Robinson told me: the moment he ¡°lost it¡±. More than 10 of his friends have perished over the years.
I asked if his course might have been different had he found ONS as a teenager. ¡°I don¡¯t know, man,¡± he said. ¡°You can¡¯t tell a youngster nothing.¡± Back when he was a ¡°big factor¡± in Central, he had houses, expensive clothing, and a reputation for toughness. When he got out of jail, there was only his girlfriend and his friends at ONS. ¡°Everything was ass-backwards, and they helped me see farther.¡± He said he felt grateful. ¡°This is once-in-a-lifetime help, man. I¡¯m smart at the end of the day, not stupid.¡±
Robinson drove me back to downtown Richmond in a late-model black Dodge Charger that reeked of pot. He was still hustling a little here and there, he told me, but he swore he was ¡°done with the hardcore street stuff¡±. He and his girlfriend had recently moved to a gated apartment in a suburb where nobody knows him. And in a few weeks¡¯ time, he was scheduled for a hearing to end his probation early, which, if it happened, would allow him to travel without restrictions ? or leave the area altogether.
Lt Arnold Threets used to chase Robinson back in the days when Deep C accounted for more than half the 300 reported shootings in Richmond. ¡°If you thought of any dirt that was happening in the city at the time, Rohnell Robinson¡¯s name came up,¡± he told me. Threets, who is African-American, is a former marine with more than 25 years on the force. He was sceptical when he heard about the ONS experiment; many idealists had come and gone. Safety on the streets wasn¡¯t just a matter of making nice with violent offenders and encouraging police to do the same. Boggan told me that he spent months courting Threets because he respected his intelligence and savvy. He figured that if Threets came around, anything was possible. Eventually, he won the officer over. ¡°DeVone got my trust because he wasn¡¯t a bunny hugger,¡± Threets told me. ¡°He wasn¡¯t telling me these guys aren¡¯t dangerous.¡±
The Richmond police department gained notoriety in the 1980s for a thuggish group of white officers who wore boots and called themselves ¡°The Cowboys¡±. Brutal police beatings of African Americans led to multimillion-dollar civil rights settlements with victims. Threets, who arrived after the scandal, stressed that tactful, community-oriented policing has helped the department recover from the mistrust induced by that period. ¡°We play hard but we play clean,¡± he said. According to department records for 2015, officers used force in about 6% of arrests and received 12 complaints about use of force.
The Richmond police department is officially aligned with Operation Ceasefire, which holds night walks through violent neighbourhoods and hosts events for troubled youth. If police work has become more surgical, Threets said, it¡¯s because lowering homicides is the top priority and most of the killings are committed by a handful of shooters. ¡°This is where it gets a little dirty,¡± he told me. ¡°I didn¡¯t care so much if you messed with credit cards. As long as you were going to stop killing people, I could work with you.¡± The trouble is that there exists a newer crop of shooters for whom scams and drug dealing are less of a priority. They don¡¯t care about the money; they want the respect that comes from seeking vengeance without showing remorse.
Not all the shooters were converted by the programme. Robinson was unusual. ¡°He got it, man. Not overnight, but it clicked,¡± Threets said. Robinson¡¯s progress visibly moved him. ¡°You¡¯ve got to realise who Rohnell Robinson was ? it¡¯s like Al Capone finding Jesus.¡±
Threets said that there have been a number of poorly managed social programmes that have allowed participants to ¡°take advantage of our collective good intentions¡±, and hustle the system. He has no evidence that this is the case with the ONS. ¡°Ironically, the level of public scrutiny they receive has guarded them from these types of abuses,¡± he said.
In his view, criticism of the programme mainly comes from people who refuse to face complex reality. ¡°ONS has been successful, albeit not perfect, where others have failed,¡± Threets said. ¡°That kind of success can engender a good dose of envy, and has the potential to divert resources away from other traditional methods for addressing urban violence.¡±
Resistance to the ONS method may also reflect a more broadly American stigma against handouts. While the use of tangible incentives such as cash stipends and travel are very much in line with prevailing capitalist values, the very act of giving them away for free ? especially to those who may still operate outside of society¡¯s lawful boundaries ? would seem to conflict with a deep-seated ethos in our culture that opportunity must extend from merit.
¡°I would tend to agree [ex-felons like Robinson] don¡¯t necessarily deserve the ONS fellowship,¡± Threets conceded. ¡°But ¡¦ by definition mercy is something you receive that is unmerited.¡±
When I arrived at the gate for our flight to Seattle on another ONS trip, no two members of the Richmond crew were sitting together. The fellows were scattered around, playing with their phones. Boggan, Vaughn, and Kevin Muccular, an agent much loved for his warmth and humour, knew better than to enforce a group dynamic. They would ride to the downtown Hilton in a white Mercedes Benz SUV, eat at a restaurant, and attend an exhibition of Marcel Duchamp at the Seattle Art Museum, with detours to serve dinner at a soup kitchen and visit a youth group in a poor part of town.
Robinson was not coming. Boggan told me, smiling, that he had been offered overtime at work. Boggan had many reasons to be upbeat. He had recently become director of Richmond¡¯s ailing recreation department. The position gave the ONS a network with which to attract and serve at-risk youth before delinquent behaviour turned into felonies. A new 18-month fellowship was under way and the participants were younger than before. It was a sign that the programme is ¡°selling itself¡±, Boggan said.
Indeed, consulting opportunities for Boggan and the ONS staff were multiplying around the country, from Miami Gardens, Florida, to Toledo, Ohio. In March, the Washington DC city council unanimously voted to adopt a version of the Richmond programme, in response to a wave of homicides there last year. But it is still a contentious matter. Mayor Muriel E Bowser insists that the programme has not been properly evaluated, and refused to allocate funds in her proposed 2017 budget. Members of the council counter that they will shift money from the mayor¡¯s other law-enforcement priorities to get the programme running. In March, Boggan stepped down from his ONS post to develop a national non-profit organisation, Advance Peace. He will continue to consult city governments, including Richmond.
While some private-sector funding has clearly served the Richmond programme well, allowing the ONS to defend its controversial stipends and trips, I wondered what would be lost if such social services are not publicly supported. Boggan said the programme needed to be adapted in ways that ¡°make the best sense for each city working on it¡±.
Rasheed Shepherd gestured me over. Nearly a year had passed since our trip to Marin County, and he stood to greet me. He had left Richmond for Sacramento several months before, he told me on the plane. His girlfriend had landed a job at the post office. He could look after his five-year-old son now without concern over which blocks were off-limits. ¡°We just get on our bikes and ride,¡± he said. Calls still came in from Southside associates grumbling about the latest drama, but, Shepherd said, he had ¡°grown up¡± and lost interest. Many friends remained incarcerated. The frequent calls he received from them, guys who used to hassle him for dealing with the ONS, kept him focused. His experiences on the outside had given them a glimpse of a better life. Plus, he added, they needed him to keep their phone cards full.
¡°Truth is, I can¡¯t go back to the way I was even if I wanted to,¡± he said. He ticked off the destinations he had visited with the programme: New York, Dubai, South Africa. The last time he visited Seattle was for a firefighting workshop, part of a merchant-marine training course that the ONS sponsored. ¡°When you start doing things folks said you¡¯d never do, when you start seeing things done the right way, you think, man, that¡¯s a great way to live,¡± he said. ¡°And you don¡¯t make excuses no more.¡±
In early May 2015, Robinson had a probation hearing at the county court house. It was a bad day. The judge postponed his decision until he had a chance to review Robinson¡¯s brimming case files in full. Robinson was cruising back on the I-580 highway, not far from where LaQuisha Turner was shot, when a black car pulled up along side him, and a window started to drop. He ducked as a barrage of bullets sent the car into a guardrail. Robinson was unharmed; the Charger was written off. He did not report the shooting: if word got back to the authorities, he reasoned, his chances of getting off probation would be jeopardised.
But news of the drive-by reached the district attorney¡¯s office anyway. At his second hearing, the judge grilled him about the incident, which he took to be a sign of continued gang activity, and ordered Robinson to formally register with Richmond police as a gang member. At the news, Robinson¡¯s temper flared. He shouted all the way to the street, where office workers peeked at him from their windows. Vaughn, who had accompanied him, let him finish before responding. ¡°What they just said is that you¡¯re an animal. And you can¡¯t even take it, a little criticism. You get all upset. You know what that tells a reasonable person. ¡®Damn, if he responds like this, how would he respond if that happened.¡¯ You helping them out. Cut it out.¡±
¡°This is bullshit,¡± Robinson said. ¡°I¡¯m tired of getting treated like this, man.¡±
¡°I get it. But you¡¯re in an arena where you don¡¯t understand how it works. At least pay attention to folks that do, bro. You were supposed to keep your face straight and your mouth shut, that was your only job. And you couldn¡¯t even do that.¡±
Robinson paced back and forth, cursing and fiddling with his paperwork. ¡°You can¡¯t say nothing right; everything is wrong.¡±
Vaughn stayed in step next to him, puffing a Newport. ¡°That¡¯s not true.¡±
¡°At the end of the day that judge gonna go with what the fuck the DA say,¡± Robinson insisted. ¡°You been in the system, you know this shit.¡±
¡°When I was in the system,¡± Vaughn replied, ¡°I was playing a victim and I was angry and I looked just like you. And who the fuck wants that living next door to them? Anger has no place in that room bro, it just doesn¡¯t. You lose your argument. And I know that¡¯s hard, and I know that¡¯s frustrating. And I know it¡¯s a game we ain¡¯t used to playing. But that¡¯s why it¡¯s a game we always fucking lose.¡±
Several weeks later, Robinson¡¯s last attempt at a probation dismissal was denied, meaning he would have to wait even longer before he can get free and clear of his Richmond stalkers, as well as the associates urging him to pick up his pistol and strike back. The last time I saw him, he was in his suburban apartment. His mother and baby nephew were visiting to celebrate a birthday. He told me he had no idea who was responsible for the highway shooting. I understood that even if Robinson knew, he would never say so. That part of his street code held firm.
For the moment, he seemed at peace. We stepped onto a porch with a view of rolling hills and cypress trees. ¡°When the storm comes, it comes,¡± he told me with a shrug. ¡°That¡¯s all right, though. I just don¡¯t want to fight it any more. I¡¯m gonna leave it alone.¡± I believed Robinson; vengeance no longer drove him. But his enemies were many, and carrying such debts as his always ended badly in Richmond. Real freedom demanded a self-imposed exile, from home and family and his old identity. Sooner or later, he would have to leave Richmond for good.
Jason Motlagh is an International Reporting Fellow with the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting
? Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, or sign up to the long read weekly email here
The estranged husband of Australian teacher Gabrielle Maina could face the death penalty in Kenya if he is charged and convicted of her murder.
The 40-year-old mother of two boys, aged eight and four, was killed by a single gunshot to the neck in the upmarket Nairobi suburb of Karen last Thursday.
Her husband Cyrus Bernard Maina Njuguna and another man, John Njuguna Waithira, were arrested on Monday, local time, over the shooting and faced court on Tuesday.
However, the investigation is still in the early stages and charges have not been laid.
The Kenyan judiciary has warned the pair could face a ¡°mandatory death penalty¡± if charged and convicted.
Their lawyer Wilfred Nderishu told the ABC his clients were innocent and there was evidence to show neither was at the scene of the killing.
¡°There is evidence that is capable of corroboration by many people, as many as 10, that Cyrus was in his office at the time that the murder took place,¡± Nderishu said. ¡°Therefore, there is no way he can be placed at the scene.¡±
The court granted police a request to hold the two men in custody for another seven days while they gather evidence. They are next due to appear on 31 October.
Before Tuesday¡¯s court hearing Gabrielle Maina¡¯s lawyer, George King¡¯ori, who became her legal representative ahead of her death, said the couple was in the midst of divorce proceedings in the Kenyan courts.
The head teacher at Hillcrest preparatory school in Karen was granted a restraining order against her husband in April.
¡°She feared he had become irrational,¡± King¡¯Ori said.
Karen police have confirmed to Kenya¡¯s the Standard that Mr Maina was being held as the prime suspect in Gabrielle¡¯s murder.
¡°We believe he has information that can help us know how and why she was murdered,¡± Karen OCPD Cunningham Suiyanka told the newspaper.
¡°He is here with another suspect for interrogation.¡±
Police have also seized and are checking Gabrielle Maina¡¯s phone, which was taken by one of her alleged attackers.
Investigators believe she was accosted by three men while walking home after dropping off one of her sons at a friend¡¯s home.
A postmortem revealed she was shot in the neck, with the bullet exiting through her back, authorities said.
Because of the angle of the bullet and marks on her knees, investigators believe she was kneeling at the time.
Gabrielle Maina moved to Nairobi from Sydney in 2015 so her two sons could experience another culture and grow up near her husband¡¯s extended family, a friend said this week.
She had taught English and drama for almost five years at Sarah Redfern high school in Sydney¡¯s south-west.
The background: Terry Lynn is the Jamaican MIA, all angry invective and brutally powerful rhythms that run the gamut of electronic styles from dub and dancehall to electro and rap. Sometimes the music made by the girl from ghetto-not-so-fabulous Waterhouse (rhymes with "slaughterhouse") and her producer Phred sounds typically Jamaican and reggae-tronic; other times it has much in common with London dubstep and grime. Then again, some of these beats aren't that far removed from what goes on on a good US R&B ? say, Britney or Beyonce ? album. But make no mistake, it's Jamaica she's singing ? spitting, snarling ? about on her debut album, Kingstonlogic 2.0. "I'm a child of the soil, I was born in the ghetto/Where the gangstas roll by and then gunshot echo," goes the opening couplet on first track Child of the Soil, before segueing into the pulverisingly rhythmic synth stabs of Kingstonlogic (they're actually borrowed from Daft Punk's Technologic). Throughout this shamingly danceable record ? shaming because you're basically dancing to songs about the miserable existence that she endured growing up the youngest of nine children, surrounded by social injustice, poverty and crime ? Lynn goes some way towards replicating the sound of gunshots with her vocal delivery, as does her collaborator with his Gatling-gun beats.
Chuck D called Public Enemy "black CNN"; this is Jamaican CNN, a series of reports from the frontline of the war zone that is Waterhouse, where Lynn used to freestyle and lyrically clash with local market traders, and where she met Phred. Over three years, they worked on their music, honing and refining it until they'd created the fiercely politicised but furiously accessible electro-pop polemic that is Kingstonlogic 2.0. Not that they want it to succeed by all means necessary. Lynn and her team refuse to conform to Jamaica's payola system; instead they're using guerrilla tactics to effectively give away the music for free. Each of the original 500-copy run was emblazoned with the anti-payola message, "My music is about the people, for the people, it's about change. We will not pay media a ransom to play this for people; we are instead paying for phree copies for you". She's also using her newfound status as seditious national icon (she was recently on the cover of the country's Observer newspaper) to talk about her country's many problems, such as why Kingston should have a higher murder rate than Baghdad. For us, there are only a couple of things wrong with Lynn: the cover of the Melodians' Rivers of Babylon on her album, and the tendency to kill a rhyme stone dead (grime/crime/slime/dime/time, that sort of thing). Otherwise, it's a great album, and a reminder of the value ? the thrill ? to be had from seeing musicians in the mainstream with genuine presence and an air of real menace.
The buzz: "Everything MIA should be, but isn't (there's not a hint of catwalk chic here)."
The truth: If Grace Jones made a digital dancehall album about murder and corruption, where Nightclubbing refers not to after-hours disco dancing but to twilight beatings, with a young Sly & Robbie on speed ...
Most likely to: Rhyme "education" with "segregation" with "degradation" with "every nation" with "medication" with "dedication" with "meditation" with "vegetation".
Least likely to: Move to Baghdad.
What to buy: Kingstonlogic 2.0 is released by Phree Music on 6 April.
Tomorrow's new band: My Toys Like Me.
A fourth person has been arrested in connection with the death of Syrian-born preacher Abdul Hadi Arwani.
The Metropolitan police said a 36-year-old man was arrested by detectives on Friday on suspicion of conspiracy to murder. His arrest was only made public on Sunday when he was released on bail.
Arwani, a critic of the Assad regime in Syria and an imam at the An Noor mosque from 2005 to 2011, was found dead in a car with gunshot wounds on 7 April in the Greenhill area of north-west London.
One man, Leslie Cooper, 36, has appeared in court charged with Arwani¡¯s murder.
A 61-year-old man was arrested on Tuesday on suspicion of conspiracy to murder and further arrested on Wednesday on suspicion of the commission, preparation and instigation of acts of terrorism.
A 53-year-old woman was arrested on Wednesday on suspicion of the commission, preparation and instigation of acts of terrorism. Both remain in police custody.
Detectives from the Met¡¯s counter-terrorism command continued to investigate.Police have released CCTV footage of an armed raid on a shop in Plaistow, east London. The shopkeeper was seriously injured after trying to defend himself against one of the men, who was carrying a shotgun. The Metropolitan Police are offering ¡Ì20,000 reward for information on the two suspects, who have not been found
Mark Duggan, whose shooting by police sparked London's riots, did not fire a shot at police officers before they killed him, the Independent Police Complaints Commission said on Tuesday.
Releasing the initial findings of ballistics tests, the police watchdog said a CO19 firearms officer fired two bullets, and that a bullet that lodged in a police radio was "consistent with being fired from a police gun".
One theory, not confirmed by the IPCC, is that the bullet became lodged in the radio from a ricochet or after passing through Duggan.
Duggan, 29, was killed last Thursday in Tottenham, north London, after armed officers stopped the minicab in which he was travelling.
The IPCC said Duggan was carrying a loaded gun, but it had no evidence that the weapon had been fired. It said tests were continuing.
The officer who fired the fatal shots has been removed from firearms duties, which is standard procedure, pending the IPCC investigation.
Officers from the Met's Operation Trident and Special Crime Directorate 11, accompanied by officers from CO19, the Met's specialist firearms command, stopped the silver Toyota Estima minicab in Ferry Lane, close to Tottenham Hale tube station, to arrest Duggan.
He was killed by a single gunshot wound to the chest, and received a second gunshot wound to his right bicep. He was pronounced dead at the scene at 6.41pm.
The IPCC's statement said the bullet lodged in the police radio was a "jacketed round". This is a police-issue bullet and is "consistent with having been fired from a [police] Heckler and Koch MP5", it said.
The non-police firearm found at the scene was a converted BBM Bruni self-loading pistol. The gun was found to have a "bulleted cartridge" in the magazine, which is being subjected to further forensic tests.
The officer whose radio was hit was taken to Homerton hospital where he was examined and discharged later that night. The minicab driver was not injured but was badly shaken by what he saw, the IPCC said. His account, as well as those of the officers, is being examined along with the forensic evidence.
The police watchdog said it was examining CCTV footage of the area, including from buses passing by at the time.
The statement said: "Our investigators will be examining recordings of radio transmissions from both police and London ambulance service, including 999 calls, with a view to tracing further witnesses. We will also be examining any intelligence and surveillance material leading up to the planning of the operation."
The IPCC commissioner Rachel Cerfontyne said: "Any concerns expressed by the wider public about a perceived lack of information from the IPCC should be considered in the context that I am only willing to share information once I have had it independently verified and once the people who are directly involved in this case ? including Mr Duggan's family and community leaders ? have been fully informed."
An inquest into Duggan's death was opened at north London coroner's court on Tuesday. The coroner, Andrew Walker, adjourned the hearing to 12 December and offered his sympathies to Duggan's family.
"As members of the family will know, in due course there will be an inquest touching the death of Mark Duggan and this is the first stage in that process, he said. "Of course, as well as offering our deepest sympathies, I would like to reassure members of the family that we will be working closely with Mr Duggan's family and the IPCC throughout the process."
After the hearing, the family said they were "distressed" by the rioting in the wake of his death. In a statement on their behalf, Helen Shaw, from the organisation Inquest, said: "The family want everyone to know that the disorder going on has nothing to do with finding out what has happened to Mark. They also want people to know they are deeply distressed by the disorder affecting communities across the country."
The daughter of a late British peer has been shot dead in the Philippines in what appears to be a vigilante-style gang hit in the country¡¯s bloody crackdown on drugs.
Maria Aurora Moynihan, 45, was left in the street in the capital Manila on 10 September, police said. Her attackers propped up a cardboard sign against her body which said: ¡°Drug pusher to the celebrities.¡±
Moynihan was the daughter of the 3rd Lord Moynihan, a British peer who fled to the Philippines in the late 1960s following fraud allegations. He ran several brothels and was allegedly active in drugs trafficking until 1991, when he died of a stroke.
A dual British-Filipino citizen, Maria Moynihan was also accused of involvement in the narcotics business. She had been on bail following charges of possession of illegal drugs in 2013.
¡°Witnesses told us they heard a series of gunshots, then saw a vehicle leaving the area. They did not see its licence plates,¡± Ch Insp Tito Jay Cuden told Agence France-Presse.
He said no arrests had been made. ¡°She¡¯s considered a drug personality,¡± he added.
The Philippines president, Rodrigo Duterte, has spent his first three months in office waging a campaign to kill all involved in the rampant drugs trade, causing outrage from rights groups and foreign governments.
More than 3,500 alleged drug dealers and addicts have been killed, about a third of them in police operations but the majority by armed vigilante militias. Duterte has publicly encouraged civilians to kill addicts and said he will not prosecute police for extrajudicial executions.
Moynihan¡¯s sister, a famous film actor in the Philippines, said her family had one priority following the death.
¡°That is to protect her children from further pain and suffering so that they, and we as a family may take this time to grieve, mourn but most of all celebrate the life of this exceptional human being I will forever have the privilege of calling my sister,¡± Maritoni Fernandez said. A police investigation is ongoing.
Local media aired footage of a vehicle stopping and opening its door on the deserted part of the street where the body was later found. The video was too grainy to determine exactly what happened.
Moynihan¡¯s father was described in his Telegraph obituary as a ¡°confidence trickster, brothel-keeper, drug-smuggler and police informer¡±.
He succeeded his father in 1965 as the Liberal whip in the House of Lords. But by the end of the 1960s, he was facing more than 50 charges including fraud and so fled to Spain and then the Philippines.
He remarried a Filipino belly dancer who ran a chain of massage parlours across Manila and became involved in the local narcotic trade, according to Australian police. He referred to the then president Ferdinand Marcos as ¡°my drinking chum¡± and avoided arrest.
After being linked to a Sydney criminal syndicate known as the ¡°Double Bay Mob¡±, which was importing heroin from Manila, the baron was persuaded to act as a police informant.
In 1988, he helped secure the arrest of Howard Marks, the cannabis trafficker whose autobiography, Mr Nice, became a best-selling book. Moynihan secretly recorded ¡°drug dealing¡± conversations with Marks for the US Drug Enforcement Administration.
Educated in French literature in Paris, Maria Moynihan was arrested in 2013 for alleged possession of shabu, or crystal meth, the drug Duterte wants to rid the country of.
? This article was amended on 21 September 2016 to clarify that people killed in the crackdown are alleged, not necessarily proven, to be drug dealers and drug addicts.
The background: Terry Lynn is the Jamaican MIA, all angry invective and brutally powerful rhythms that run the gamut of electronic styles from dub and dancehall to electro and rap. Sometimes the music made by the girl from ghetto-not-so-fabulous Waterhouse (rhymes with "slaughterhouse") and her producer Phred sounds typically Jamaican and reggae-tronic; other times it has much in common with London dubstep and grime. Then again, some of these beats aren't that far removed from what goes on on a good US R&B ? say, Britney or Beyonce ? album. But make no mistake, it's Jamaica she's singing ? spitting, snarling ? about on her debut album, Kingstonlogic 2.0. "I'm a child of the soil, I was born in the ghetto/Where the gangstas roll by and then gunshot echo," goes the opening couplet on first track Child of the Soil, before segueing into the pulverisingly rhythmic synth stabs of Kingstonlogic (they're actually borrowed from Daft Punk's Technologic). Throughout this shamingly danceable record ? shaming because you're basically dancing to songs about the miserable existence that she endured growing up the youngest of nine children, surrounded by social injustice, poverty and crime ? Lynn goes some way towards replicating the sound of gunshots with her vocal delivery, as does her collaborator with his Gatling-gun beats.
Chuck D called Public Enemy "black CNN"; this is Jamaican CNN, a series of reports from the frontline of the war zone that is Waterhouse, where Lynn used to freestyle and lyrically clash with local market traders, and where she met Phred. Over three years, they worked on their music, honing and refining it until they'd created the fiercely politicised but furiously accessible electro-pop polemic that is Kingstonlogic 2.0. Not that they want it to succeed by all means necessary. Lynn and her team refuse to conform to Jamaica's payola system; instead they're using guerrilla tactics to effectively give away the music for free. Each of the original 500-copy run was emblazoned with the anti-payola message, "My music is about the people, for the people, it's about change. We will not pay media a ransom to play this for people; we are instead paying for phree copies for you". She's also using her newfound status as seditious national icon (she was recently on the cover of the country's Observer newspaper) to talk about her country's many problems, such as why Kingston should have a higher murder rate than Baghdad. For us, there are only a couple of things wrong with Lynn: the cover of the Melodians' Rivers of Babylon on her album, and the tendency to kill a rhyme stone dead (grime/crime/slime/dime/time, that sort of thing). Otherwise, it's a great album, and a reminder of the value ? the thrill ? to be had from seeing musicians in the mainstream with genuine presence and an air of real menace.
The buzz: "Everything MIA should be, but isn't (there's not a hint of catwalk chic here)."
The truth: If Grace Jones made a digital dancehall album about murder and corruption, where Nightclubbing refers not to after-hours disco dancing but to twilight beatings, with a young Sly & Robbie on speed ...
Most likely to: Rhyme "education" with "segregation" with "degradation" with "every nation" with "medication" with "dedication" with "meditation" with "vegetation".
Least likely to: Move to Baghdad.
What to buy: Kingstonlogic 2.0 is released by Phree Music on 6 April.
Tomorrow's new band: My Toys Like Me.
A fourth person has been arrested in connection with the death of Syrian-born preacher Abdul Hadi Arwani.
The Metropolitan police said a 36-year-old man was arrested by detectives on Friday on suspicion of conspiracy to murder. His arrest was only made public on Sunday when he was released on bail.
Arwani, a critic of the Assad regime in Syria and an imam at the An Noor mosque from 2005 to 2011, was found dead in a car with gunshot wounds on 7 April in the Greenhill area of north-west London.
One man, Leslie Cooper, 36, has appeared in court charged with Arwani¡¯s murder.
A 61-year-old man was arrested on Tuesday on suspicion of conspiracy to murder and further arrested on Wednesday on suspicion of the commission, preparation and instigation of acts of terrorism.
A 53-year-old woman was arrested on Wednesday on suspicion of the commission, preparation and instigation of acts of terrorism. Both remain in police custody.
Detectives from the Met¡¯s counter-terrorism command continued to investigate.Police have released CCTV footage of an armed raid on a shop in Plaistow, east London. The shopkeeper was seriously injured after trying to defend himself against one of the men, who was carrying a shotgun. The Metropolitan Police are offering ¡Ì20,000 reward for information on the two suspects, who have not been found
Mark Duggan, whose shooting by police sparked London's riots, did not fire a shot at police officers before they killed him, the Independent Police Complaints Commission said on Tuesday.
Releasing the initial findings of ballistics tests, the police watchdog said a CO19 firearms officer fired two bullets, and that a bullet that lodged in a police radio was "consistent with being fired from a police gun".
One theory, not confirmed by the IPCC, is that the bullet became lodged in the radio from a ricochet or after passing through Duggan.
Duggan, 29, was killed last Thursday in Tottenham, north London, after armed officers stopped the minicab in which he was travelling.
The IPCC said Duggan was carrying a loaded gun, but it had no evidence that the weapon had been fired. It said tests were continuing.
The officer who fired the fatal shots has been removed from firearms duties, which is standard procedure, pending the IPCC investigation.
Officers from the Met's Operation Trident and Special Crime Directorate 11, accompanied by officers from CO19, the Met's specialist firearms command, stopped the silver Toyota Estima minicab in Ferry Lane, close to Tottenham Hale tube station, to arrest Duggan.
He was killed by a single gunshot wound to the chest, and received a second gunshot wound to his right bicep. He was pronounced dead at the scene at 6.41pm.
The IPCC's statement said the bullet lodged in the police radio was a "jacketed round". This is a police-issue bullet and is "consistent with having been fired from a [police] Heckler and Koch MP5", it said.
The non-police firearm found at the scene was a converted BBM Bruni self-loading pistol. The gun was found to have a "bulleted cartridge" in the magazine, which is being subjected to further forensic tests.
The officer whose radio was hit was taken to Homerton hospital where he was examined and discharged later that night. The minicab driver was not injured but was badly shaken by what he saw, the IPCC said. His account, as well as those of the officers, is being examined along with the forensic evidence.
The police watchdog said it was examining CCTV footage of the area, including from buses passing by at the time.
The statement said: "Our investigators will be examining recordings of radio transmissions from both police and London ambulance service, including 999 calls, with a view to tracing further witnesses. We will also be examining any intelligence and surveillance material leading up to the planning of the operation."
The IPCC commissioner Rachel Cerfontyne said: "Any concerns expressed by the wider public about a perceived lack of information from the IPCC should be considered in the context that I am only willing to share information once I have had it independently verified and once the people who are directly involved in this case ? including Mr Duggan's family and community leaders ? have been fully informed."
An inquest into Duggan's death was opened at north London coroner's court on Tuesday. The coroner, Andrew Walker, adjourned the hearing to 12 December and offered his sympathies to Duggan's family.
"As members of the family will know, in due course there will be an inquest touching the death of Mark Duggan and this is the first stage in that process, he said. "Of course, as well as offering our deepest sympathies, I would like to reassure members of the family that we will be working closely with Mr Duggan's family and the IPCC throughout the process."
After the hearing, the family said they were "distressed" by the rioting in the wake of his death. In a statement on their behalf, Helen Shaw, from the organisation Inquest, said: "The family want everyone to know that the disorder going on has nothing to do with finding out what has happened to Mark. They also want people to know they are deeply distressed by the disorder affecting communities across the country."
The daughter of a late British peer has been shot dead in the Philippines in what appears to be a vigilante-style gang hit in the country¡¯s bloody crackdown on drugs.
Maria Aurora Moynihan, 45, was left in the street in the capital Manila on 10 September, police said. Her attackers propped up a cardboard sign against her body which said: ¡°Drug pusher to the celebrities.¡±
Moynihan was the daughter of the 3rd Lord Moynihan, a British peer who fled to the Philippines in the late 1960s following fraud allegations. He ran several brothels and was allegedly active in drugs trafficking until 1991, when he died of a stroke.
A dual British-Filipino citizen, Maria Moynihan was also accused of involvement in the narcotics business. She had been on bail following charges of possession of illegal drugs in 2013.
¡°Witnesses told us they heard a series of gunshots, then saw a vehicle leaving the area. They did not see its licence plates,¡± Ch Insp Tito Jay Cuden told Agence France-Presse.
He said no arrests had been made. ¡°She¡¯s considered a drug personality,¡± he added.
The Philippines president, Rodrigo Duterte, has spent his first three months in office waging a campaign to kill all involved in the rampant drugs trade, causing outrage from rights groups and foreign governments.
More than 3,500 alleged drug dealers and addicts have been killed, about a third of them in police operations but the majority by armed vigilante militias. Duterte has publicly encouraged civilians to kill addicts and said he will not prosecute police for extrajudicial executions.
Moynihan¡¯s sister, a famous film actor in the Philippines, said her family had one priority following the death.
¡°That is to protect her children from further pain and suffering so that they, and we as a family may take this time to grieve, mourn but most of all celebrate the life of this exceptional human being I will forever have the privilege of calling my sister,¡± Maritoni Fernandez said. A police investigation is ongoing.
Local media aired footage of a vehicle stopping and opening its door on the deserted part of the street where the body was later found. The video was too grainy to determine exactly what happened.
Moynihan¡¯s father was described in his Telegraph obituary as a ¡°confidence trickster, brothel-keeper, drug-smuggler and police informer¡±.
He succeeded his father in 1965 as the Liberal whip in the House of Lords. But by the end of the 1960s, he was facing more than 50 charges including fraud and so fled to Spain and then the Philippines.
He remarried a Filipino belly dancer who ran a chain of massage parlours across Manila and became involved in the local narcotic trade, according to Australian police. He referred to the then president Ferdinand Marcos as ¡°my drinking chum¡± and avoided arrest.
After being linked to a Sydney criminal syndicate known as the ¡°Double Bay Mob¡±, which was importing heroin from Manila, the baron was persuaded to act as a police informant.
In 1988, he helped secure the arrest of Howard Marks, the cannabis trafficker whose autobiography, Mr Nice, became a best-selling book. Moynihan secretly recorded ¡°drug dealing¡± conversations with Marks for the US Drug Enforcement Administration.
Educated in French literature in Paris, Maria Moynihan was arrested in 2013 for alleged possession of shabu, or crystal meth, the drug Duterte wants to rid the country of.
? This article was amended on 21 September 2016 to clarify that people killed in the crackdown are alleged, not necessarily proven, to be drug dealers and drug addicts.
Although Christopher Wallace¡¯s childhood wasn¡¯t quite as impoverished as the song would suggest, his debut single, Juicy, is widely regarded as Notorious BIG¡¯s finest recorded moment. Biggie was signed by Sean Combs to Uptown Records in March 1992, before following Combs to his new imprint, Bad Boy Records, months later. Juicy was a loose autobiographical account of Biggie¡¯s rise to the top of Brooklyn¡¯s hip-hop scene.
He was born on 21 May 1972 in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighbourhood of Brooklyn, where he lived with his mother. He went on to have various run-ins with police and a stint in prison in 1991 for dealing drugs. He began rapping as a teenager, and after leaving jail adopted the name Biggie Smalls and released a freestyle mixtape. His lyrics told of extreme struggle, near-starvation and missed Christmases. They were exaggerations, but they added drama to the tracks and revealed a gift for storytelling. The lyrical flow of Juicy is remarkable. It¡¯s backed by a sample of Mtume¡¯s Juicy Fruit that gives an uplifting touch to the rapper¡¯s rags-to-riches tale.Biggie¡¯s second single was an immodest introduction that was unnecessary, given the success of his Juicy debut single and his album, Ready to Die. Big Poppa portrays a surprisingly lovable character, even if he does seem to be Hollywood¡¯s idea of a Mafia kingpin. Big Poppa ? one of Wallace¡¯s many nicknames ? is also, against all odds, a ladies¡¯ man, despite the fact that he was married. He boasts about his lavish lifestyle and namedrops luxury brands ? which would become one of hip-hop¡¯s predominant themes.
Gimme the Loot is far more representative of Ready to Die than Juicy or Big Poppa. It is hardcore hip-hop, rooted in the New York streets, with a bleakness that is found throughout his 2004 album. Everyday Struggle¡¯s theme is made clear in its title, while Ready to Die itself reflected Wallace¡¯s desolate life choices. Suicidal Thoughts ? the album¡¯s closer ? delivered a call for help and a gunshot to end the album. Gimme the Loot, however, is the most impressive track. Biggie voices two alternating characters involved in a robbery plot, adapting different accents for each, giving the impression that an uncredited guest artist is playing one of the two roles. His flow is amazing, and his ad-libs were brilliant.
One More Chance was originally a Ready to Die album track, featuring lyrics so explicit that the song verged on the pornographic. Instead of censoring the song for a single release, however, Biggie put out a massively different remix. Gone was the Jackson 5 sample of the album version; this one is backed by DeBarge¡¯s Stay With Me, while the chorus vocals are provided by Wallace¡¯s wife, Faith Evans. When it entered the Billboard Hot 100 at No 2, One More Chance (remix) became the joint-highest debuting single ever, tying with Michael and Janet Jackson¡¯s Scream. Following Biggie¡¯s death in 1997, Puff Daddy and Faith Evans¡¯s tribute to him, I¡¯ll Be Missing You, went one better, debuting at No 1.
At the end of 1994, on his way to visit Biggie at a recording studio in New York, Tupac was robbed and shot in the downstairs lobby. It¡¯s never been confirmed who was behind the crime, but Tupac was adamant that Biggie was responsible. The pair had once been very close friends, but this was the beginning of the heated west coast v east coast rivalry that cast a shadow over hip-hop for years. Who Shot Ya? was written and recorded before the incident, but released as Big Poppa¡¯s B-side afterwards, and Tupac believed it to be about him, although he¡¯s not mentioned in the lyrics, which see BIG boasting about his criminal connections and threatening his opponents. Tupac responded by releasing Hit Em Up, which targeted Biggie, Combs and members of Biggie¡¯s Junior Mafia crew, as well as the prominent east-coast outfit Mobb Deep. Biggie did not reply in turn, claiming that wasn¡¯t his style. He did, however, later address claims that Tupac had sex with his wife in our next pick ¡¦Jay Z came from a similar background to Biggie, and his debut album, Reasonable Doubt, featured one of the few collaborations between the two titans. Although, at the time, Wallace was clearly Brooklyn¡¯s finest, the song features an interpolating battle rap between the two artists. While the battle is fun and respectful, Biggie also takes this chance to take playfully provocative lyrical shots at Tupac. Not only does he mention Who Shot Ya?, he also replies to the rumours linking Faith Evans¡¯s pregnancy and Tupac¡¯s claims to have slept with her on his track Hit Em Up months earlier. Instead of an aggressive attack, he instead jokingly concludes one of his verses with: ¡°If Fay had twins, she¡¯d probably have two Pacs / Get it? Tupac¡¯s?¡±With the huge boom in crack cocaine¡¯s popularity in New York during the 80s, it was almost inevitable that a young man would fall on to the wrong side of the law when he got the chance to join his peers out on the street. From the age of around 12, Wallace spent hours out in Bed-Stuy hustling, becoming involved with small-time gangsters, and soon becoming one of the neighbourhood¡¯s most prominent crack dealers. Ten Crack Commandments doesn¡¯t glamorise hard drugs, working as a guide to surviving the game. The lyrics and theme can be read as relating to the cut-throat music business, as well as his criminal past.Despite the intensifying feud between the coasts¡¯ hip-hop scenes, one of the songs from Life After Death featured the only group to record with both Biggie and Tupac, Bone Thugs-n-Harmony. The main hook of Notorious Thugs is one of the most intricately melodic in any of Wallace¡¯s studio work, and it¡¯s said that after five hours of repeatedly listening to the track¡¯s foundations, without writing anything down, he performed and recorded his verse in just one take. Wallace¡¯s traditional boom-bap style was modified to keep up with the more tongue-twisting approach of Bone Thugs. Although Biggie¡¯s input is over very quickly, allowing the guest act to take over, the artist¡¯s introductory verse for Notorious Thugs has gone down as one of his all-time best.
Life After Death, Biggie¡¯s second album, was originaly scheduled for release on 31 October 1996. Instead, its release was pushed back to 25 March 1997. Then, on 9 March, Biggie was shot and killed, aged 24, in a drive-by shooting on his way to the Vibe magazine afterparty for the Soul Train music awards in Los Angeles. Life After Death, then, became a posthumous and prophetically named album. Its first two singles ? Hypnotize and Mo¡¯ Money, Mo¡¯ Problems ? were both US No 1s. While Mo¡¯ Money was very much Sean Combs and Mase¡¯s song, again featuring just one verse from Biggie (the video focuses heavily on Combs), Wallace did manage to film a video for the lead single, just weeks before his death. Another slice of materialistic bragging, filled with pop-culture and luxury brand references, Hypnotize is backed by a deeply bombastic bass line, taken from Herb Alpert¡¯s Rise. Thanks to the expert production alongside Wallace¡¯s vocal delivery, the sample perfectly matches the artist¡¯s slick flow.
The third and final single from Life After Death was another rags-to-riches tale, incorporated into a pop-rap crossover. Unlike Juicy, however, Sky¡¯s the Limit is less boastful than inspirational. It begins with a spoken introduction from his mother Voletta Wallace, before Biggie begins reminiscing and looking back on his relatively humble beginnings in front of a live audience. Accompanied by a soulful chorus from R&B group 112 that heavily samples D Train¡¯s Keep On, Sky¡¯s the Limit didn¡¯t just provide Biggie with one last chance to tell his life story; it¡¯s also one of his most laidback and least explicit recordings. When it came to filming the video, Biggie¡¯s role was played by children depicting Wallace and a number of his Junior Mafia cohorts. It provided a surprisingly fitting tribute.
The incident began when a group of men burst into the club, which was due to host the launch night of the debut single of Lisa Maffia, a singer with the notorious garage group So Solid Crew.
Shots were fired and a man was injured in the shoulder. In the chase which followed, witnesses said gunfire was exchanged between the two cars. One crashed and a 27-year-old man was found dead in the passenger seat with a bullet wound to his head.
Officers from Operation Trident, the Scotland Yard unit set up to tackle violence within the black community, were investigating the incident. It is thought the men were members of rival gangs.
Around 300 people were attending an all-night Easter party at the Turnmills club in Clerkenwell, central London. Lisa Maffia was at the top of the bill, but her appearance was cancelled at the last minute.
At around 2.30am, six to eight men forced their way past doormen into the club. Shots were fired and a 27-year-old man was hit in the shoulder. As clubbers dived for cover or ran for the exits, two groups of men left the club and got into two sports cars.
There was a short chase along Clerkenwell Road, and witnesses said shots were fired between the cars. The chase ended when one of the cars hit a parked car, and the other drove away.
A 27-year-old man was found dead in the passenger seat of the car which crashed, with a gunshot would to the head.
One man in his mid 20s was arrested outside the club.
The club and streets around it remained sealed off yesterday. Officers undertook a fingertip search of the pavement outside the club. No weapons were recovered but ammunition which was found is being examined.
Pritin Patel, 25, an IT technician from Harrow, north-west London, who was at Turnmills, said he had seen a group of around eight people "running and shouting" through the club.
He said: "I was in the House room on the ground floor of the club with a group of friends. I saw a whole bunch of guys come running through the club. There were about eight of them and I thought there had been a fight."
Scotland Yard confirmed that officers from Operation Trident were involved in the investigation.
Detectives will be examining why So Solid's Lisa Maffia did not appear at the event.
The 30-strong group of rappers and DJs with a large following in south London, has attracted unfavourable headlines since two people were shot at a London Astoria show. Last year the group's Ashley Walters was sentenced to 18 months for carrying a loaded revolver.
The group's association with gun violence was back in the headlines earlier this year after two Birmingham girls died when they were caught in the crossfire between rival gangs during a New Year party.
As the debate over the shootings focused on the part rap music may have had to play, the culture minister, Kim Howells, branded So Solid Crew "idiots" for "glorifying gun culture and violence".
In recent years, Turnmills has become one of London's most popular clubs. Many famous DJs have entertained there and it pioneered clubbing on a Sunday night.
But it has a colourful past. The notorious north London criminal clan, the Adams family, were at one time involved in the club, and "Mad" Frankie Fraser - a member of the Richardson gang which feuded with the Krays during the 60s - was shot outside it.
The lead guitarist of a country music band playing Route 91 Harvest festival, where a gunman murdered 58 people on Sunday night, has said the horrific experience of the attack has changed his views on gun laws in America.
¡°I¡¯ve been a proponent of the [second] amendment my entire life,¡± Caleb Keeter posted on Twitter. ¡°Until the events of last night. I cannot express how wrong I was.¡±
In the chaotic hours after the attack, which began around 10pm, the members of the Josh Abbott Band were eventually able to post a message on social media, saying that the band and crew were safe.
¡°I¡¯ll never unhear those gunshots; and our band [and] crew will never forget how that moment made them feel,¡± singer Josh Abbott wrote on Twitter. ¡°Our hearts are with all the victims.¡±
But Keeter went further, describing the deadliest shooting in modern US history as a revelation. He said that members of the band¡¯s crew have concealed handgun licenses, and legal firearms on the bus.
¡°They were useless,¡± he said. ¡°We couldn¡¯t touch them for fear police might think that we were part of the massacre and shoot us. A small group (or one man) laid waste to a city with dedicated, fearless police officers desperately trying to help, because of access to an insane amount of firepower. Enough is enough.¡±
Keeter said that he spent the harrowing moments of the shooting ¡°writing to my parents and the love of my life a goodbye¡± ? and ¡°a living will because I felt like I wasn¡¯t going to live through the night¡±.
Around him, his friends, bandmates and crew were trapped, under fire. ¡°These rounds were powerful enough that my crew guys just standing in a close proximity of a victim shot by this fucking coward received shrapnel wounds.¡±
The feeling, he wrote, ¡°was enough for me to realize that this is completely and totally out of hand¡±.
¡°We need gun control RIGHT. NOW,¡± he added. ¡°My biggest regret is that I stubbornly didn¡¯t realize it until my brothers on the road and myself were threatened by it.¡±
Many country musicians have shied away from politics in recent years, fearing a backlash from fans ? as the Dixie Chicks suffered for their opposition to the Iraq war. Exceptions include Lee Greenwood and Toby Keith, who performed at the inauguration of Donald Trump, who has promised to defend gun rights from attempts to regulate firearms. Keith defended the performance, noting that he played events for Republican and Democratic presidents: ¡°I don¡¯t apologize for performing for our country or military.¡±
The National Rifle Association, the pro-gun lobbying group, has also established an arm called NRA Country that features country music artists, and encourages musicians and fans to ¡°celebrate the lifestyle¡±. In April, Trump called himself ¡°a true friend and champion¡± of the lobbying group.
¡°No longer will the government be trying to undermine your rights and your freedoms as Americans,¡± the president said at an annual NRA conference. ¡°Instead, we will work with you, by your side.¡±
Over the years, Keeter has argued in favor of gun rights, arguing on Twitter that if current laws were ¡°actually enforced, the people committing the shootings wouldn¡¯t have these guns.¡± In 2012, he went so far as to say ¡°I fear giving the ability to regulate our weapons to the institution that makes gun ownership a necessity.¡±
He said he regretted that on Monday. ¡°I saw this happening for years and did nothing,¡± he wrote. ¡°I¡¯d like to do what I can now.¡±
Also on Monday, Democrats in the Senate and House called for universal background checks on gun purchases and a commission to research gun violence prevention.
The Trump White House resisted those calls, with spokeswoman Sarah Huckabee Sanders saying: ¡°There is a time and place for a political debate. But this is a time to unite as a country.
It would be premature to discuss policy when we don¡¯t fully know all the facts or what took place last night.¡±
There was no clear gunshot residue from the murder weapon on his hands and no blood from either victim on his body or clothes. Yet Terry Edwards has been put to death in Texas as the result of a conviction his attorneys argue was deeply flawed and potentially tainted with racial bias.
After the federal fifth circuit appeals court denied his petition on Wednesday, Edwards¡¯ final hope for a stay of execution and a fresh examination of his case rested with a last-day appeal to the US supreme court.
But that failed and Edwards, 43, died of lethal injection at 10:17pm on Thursday at the state¡¯s death chamber in Huntsville, said Texas department of criminal justice spokesman Jason Clark in a statement.
¡°Yes, I made peace with God. I hope y¡¯all make peace with this,¡± Edwards said before he was put to death, according to the statement released by Clark.
The execution was the 540th in Texas since the supreme court reinstated the death penalty in 1976, the most of any state.
Edwards was fired from his job at a Subway in suburban Dallas in 2002 for suspected theft of money. He returned a couple of weeks later with his cousin, Kirk. The sandwich shop was robbed and two employees were shot dead.
Mickell Goodwin, 26, and the store manager, Tommy Walker, 34, died from close-range bullet wounds on 8 July 2002. A witness reported seeing Terry Edwards dumping a gun into a bin across the street. He was arrested soon afterwards and convicted in 2003.
Kirk Edwards pleaded guilty to robbery in exchange for a 25-year sentence with the possibility of parole. Terry, who in contrast to his cousin had no history of violence, according to his lawyers, received the death penalty.
At trial the prosecution asserted that Terry Edwards pulled the trigger, telling the court that he went to Subway ¡°with murder in mind, with greed in mind, with evil in his heart¡±. But in appeals his lawyers have claimed that he was not the killer and that his cousin is a more likely culprit.
Under Texas¡¯s ¡°law of parties¡±, accomplices can be sentenced to death even if they do not personally commit murder. Texas has executed more people since 1976 than the next six states combined. Last year it put seven prisoners to death by lethal injection, while Georgia led the nation with nine. Edwards would be the second inmate executed by Texas this month. The state has seven more scheduled for later in the year.
Edwards¡¯ attorneys have also cast doubt on the fairness of the jury selection process. They said in a statement that prosecutors ¡°removed all eligible African Americans from the jury pool of 3,000 citizens [143 of whom were questioned] and seated an all-white jury to decide the fate of an African American man charged with murdering two white people¡±.
They say they have obtained a strike list that next to the names of 32 of the questioned potential jurors has a handwritten, encircled ¡°B¡± that could stand for ¡°black¡±.
¡°When we saw the strike list with B¡¯s next to potential jurors names we were stunned,¡± John Mills, one of the attorneys, said.
In May last year the supreme court ruled in a case known as Foster v Chatman that the conviction and death sentence of a black man convicted of killing a white woman in Georgia in 1986 was unconstitutional because of the way potential black jurors were excluded. In that case, prosecutors marked the names of possible black jurors with a ¡°B¡± on lists.
But in Edwards¡¯ case, Mills said that they have been unable to obtain juror questionnaires. These would indicate jurors¡¯ races and allow cross-referencing with the strike list, perhaps proving the theory that ¡°B¡± means ¡°black¡±. The questionnaires appear to have been lost.
The defence called as a witness a trace evidence analyst who ended up testifying on cross-examination that Terry Edwards could have removed two of the three chemical components typically found in gunshot residue from his hands, perhaps from sweating or wiping it off. But Edwards¡¯ attorneys say a review they commissioned last year by a former FBI agent contradicts this, and argues: ¡°The testing and evidence introduced at trial raises very serious questions of reliability.¡±
Mills also said it looks as if the district attorney¡¯s office has closed off access to the conviction integrity unit, a branch of the office that was set up in 2007 to review cases in the wake of a spate of wrongful convictions in the county.
¡°We¡¯re concerned that the district attorney¡¯s office is no longer interested in having the unit look at the case,¡± he said. A spokeswoman for the office did not respond to a request for comment but told the Dallas Morning News it was not true that the unit was ever assigned to the case or that communication was cut off.
Thomas D¡¯Amore, the lead prosecutor on the case, denied any wrongdoing and said he did not attempt to strike black people from the jury. D¡¯Amore said he is sure that the trial unfolded properly and that the correct verdict was reached: ¡°There is no doubt, there is overwhelming evidence, he is guilty of capital murder.¡±
1 Light My Fire
Few bands divide critical opinion like the Doors. For some, they dine at the top table of the critically revered, their company typified by Julie Burchill¡¯s line that Roxy Music, at their very best, were ¡°better than David Bowie, than the Supremes, than the Doors, than the Sex Pistols, than anyone I imagine I will ever hear¡±. However, especially in more recent years, the Doors have been subject of much reappraisal and opprobrium. Much reputational damage was probably done by Oliver Stone¡¯s abysmal 1991 biopic, with Val Kilmer playing Jim Morrison as a drunken caricature. After defining the art of the rock frontman every bit as influentially as Mick Jagger, Morrison has been subsequently blamed for every leering wannabe in leather trousers. However, love or loathe him, Morrison brought theatrical excitement to 1960s rock and the Doors albums continue to sell in significant quantities. Artists from Echo and the Bunnymen to the Stranglers to Skrillex and Chase and Status have taken something from their organ-heavy sound, while Morrison¡¯s fusion of rock and poetry inspired Patti Smith, who paid tribute to the singer on stage in Manchester as recently as last week. Light My Fire ? the band¡¯s signature song ? still best represents their adventurous creativity. In the absence of a bass player, Ray Manzarek used a Vox Continental organ as a lead instrument while his left hand played bass sounds on a Fender Rhodes piano bass ? a similar set-up to that of Sky Saxon¡¯s punkier Seeds, but the Doors took it somewhere more dreamlike and transcendental. Morrison sang about classic themes of sex and death, but Manzarek¡¯s playing equally captured the fairground aspect of Los Angeles. Penned by guitarist Robby Krieger, the single version of Light My Fire has undoubtedly been slightly dulled by radio ubiquity. However, the much longer version from their classic eponymous 1967 debut ? the first of six albums inside just four years ? still sounds glorious, not least the thrilling moment where Krieger¡¯s beautifully economical guitar solo crashes back into Manzarek¡¯s waterfalling signature melody. The three-minute edit gave them an international number one and a standard that has been covered by everyone from Shirley Bassey to Will Young.
2 The Crystal Ship
The Doors story begins on Venice Beach, Los Angeles in 1965, where Manzarek encounters fellow UCLA film student Morrison, who tells him he¡¯s been writing song lyrics with the idea of forming a band, and sings him a few lines of what would later become Moonlight Drive, on 1967¡¯s No 1 album Strange Days. Lines such as ¡°Let¡¯s swim to the moon, uh, uh, let¡¯s climb through the tide, celebrate the evenin¡¯ that the city sleeps to hide¡± so impressed Manzarek that they quickly assembled a band to accompany Morrison¡¯s poetry. Perhaps not all Morrison¡¯s words read so well on the page, but at his best he was brilliant at channelling literary heroes ? such as Arthur Rimbaud, William Blake and Aldous Huxley, whose book The Doors of Perception provided the band¡¯s name ? into crisp, fully realised pop tunes. Another from the first LP, The Crystal Ship has been variously interpreted as a farewell to a love affair (specifically, with early sweetheart Mary Werbelow), a goodbye to the dying and a trip to an afterlife dimension (also the theme of debut single Break on Through). The glacial boat itself supposedly represents the band and/or stardom, after which he will return to his soulmate. Either way, where Light My Fire was a straightforward sex song, this feels otherworldly and sentimental, with a killer opener: ¡°Before you slip into unconsciousness, I¡¯d like to have another kiss.¡± In 1967, or any other year, nobody began songs like that.
3 The Unknown Soldier
After Light My Fire¡¯s success, the last thing the Doors¡¯ career demanded was an unusual anti-war song. However, where Morrison would routinely address environmental or sociopolitical concerns, his lyrics here reflect the singer¡¯s horror at the way the Vietnam war was being presented in the US media. Meanwhile, this 1968 single dispenses with conventions of pop songwriting to include a gunshot, tolling bells, a military marching cadence and Morrison¡¯s hopeful invitation: ¡°Wait until the war is over and we¡¯re both a little older.¡± It reached No 39 with a bullet ? or rather, without, as the gunshot was edited from the version supplied to radio and most stations refused to play it ? but they¡¯d delivered one of their eeriest, most affecting songs.
4 Love Me Two TimesFor all their sometimes sprawling theatre, the Doors knew how to pen a perfect pop song. Another song written by Krieger ? clocking in at a radio-friendly 3 minutes 17 seconds ? this single from 1967¡¯s Strange Days turns blues elements into a mightily catchy tune. The lyrics are again possibly influenced by Vietnam, apparently referring to a soldier who makes love to his girlfriend for the final time before shipping out. However, Manzarek conceded that the song could variously be ¡°Robby¡¯s great blues/rock classic about lust and loss¡± or ¡°about multiple orgasms¡±. Such blurred lines meant the Doors again fell foul of some radio authorities, so listeners in New Haven were denied one of Manzarek¡¯s most glorious moments ? a freewheeling harpsichord solo.
5 Five to One
By mid-1968, Strange Days had given the Doors their first chart-topping album and they were outselling the Grateful Dead fivefold, yet were undoubtedly also part of the emerging counterculture. As a student at Florida State University in the early 1960s, Morrison had become particularly engaged with the philosophies of protest and the psychology of crowds, and brought these elements together in his performances of one of the band¡¯s most powerfully political and controversial songs, initially recorded on third album Waiting for the Sun. The title supposedly refers to the ratio in the US between young and old, perhaps with a nod to Sun Tzu¡¯s The Art of War, ¡°If our forces are 10 to the enemy¡¯s one, to surround him; if five to one, to attack him¡±. The lyrics ? ¡°The old get old but the young get stronger, may take a week but it may take longer. They¡¯ve got the guns, we¡¯ve got the numbers¡± ? recognise youth¡¯s dormant power and reflects Morrison¡¯s belief (as per many of the Summer of Love generation) that music could change the world. Perhaps his subsequent realisation that American youth was inherently more conservative than it let on led ? along with copious quantities of wine and beer ? to the song¡¯s infamous performance in Miami in 1969. With the stage swarmed by policemen, the star interrupts the groove to rail at the audience: ¡°You¡¯re all a bunch of fucking idiots, letting people push you around ¡¦ You¡¯re all a bunch of fucking slaves¡¦¡± etc. Morrison was subsequently arrested and put on trial for drunkenness, indecency and profanity. The Miami Five to One remains officially unreleased (you can hear it here) but this swinging take from Absolutely Live captures the tune¡¯s tumultuous live power.
6 Touch Me
We¡¯ve now heard the Doors as a psychedelic rock band, protest vehicle and pop group, but each album progressed their sound and 1969¡¯s flawed but brave the Soft Parade saw them experimenting with orchestral pop-rock. The album¡¯s big single is another Krieger composition, which takes a riff from the Four Seasons¡¯ C¡¯mon Marianne and blasts into a symphonic arrangement with a blazing saxophone solo courtesy of the great American session player Curtis Amy. In Stone¡¯s awful film, Morrison is portrayed changing the lyrics to make the song about oral sex, but surely lyrics such as: ¡°I¡¯m gonna love you/ Till the stars fall from the sky for you and I¡±, suggest that it is a song about the physical union of devotional love.
7 I Will Never Be Untrue
And maybe, deep down, Morrison was a lover, not a fighter. His latter-day reputation as a boorish drunk is not well served by the rich seam of tenderness, romance and sentimentality that runs through his band¡¯s canon. This long-lost live obscurity from the Aquarius Theater in Hollywood finds Morrison in characteristic mischievous mood ? promising a lover that he will ¡°never stay out drinking no later than two ¡¦Two thirty¡¦¡± ? before it gradually turns into a more tender song about yearning for a soulmate. Like the equally ill-fated Jimi Hendrix and Janis Joplin, Morrison was among the 60s generation for whom Blake¡¯s ¡°the road to excess leads to the palace of wisdom¡± provided a doctrine, but all were young people unprepared for the cost, and his later lyrics contain several references to loneliness and melancholy. Here, we can now hear the effects of hard living in Morrison¡¯s vocal, but this simple, slow blues ? which surfaced on 1999¡¯s Essential Rarities ? is surely one of their most human and lovely.
8 The Wasp (Texas Radio and the Big Beat)
John Peel¡¯s favourite Doors song typifies the blend of poetry and music which so entranced Patti Smith. The lyrics were written some years previously and Morrison initially performed them as poetry before Manzarek and drummer John Densmore conjured up this crackling funk beat for 1971¡¯s L.A. Woman. Effectively a eulogy to Morrison¡¯s inspiration by music, the vivid language and imagery describes the impact of hearing DJs such as Wolfman Jack in his youth as they blasted out of Texas and Virginia, mesmerising the youngster and the ¡°friends I have gathered together on this thin raft ¡¦ Out here on the perimeter there are no stars/Out here we is stoned ? immaculate.¡±
9 L.A. Woman
By 1971, bloated and bearded, troubled by post-Miami litigation and something of a bete noire after various onstage incidents, Morrison looked like a man grown old before his time. Which makes it all the more remarkable that he managed to rouse himself for what may be his best set of performances. L.A. Woman, the Doors¡¯ final album with him, finds the band returning to the blues but with a new, urban raw edge. The title track pays homage to their City of Angels. For Manzarek ? who didn¡¯t exactly shy from making from grand pronouncements ? the song was about ¡°driving madly down the LA freeway. You¡¯re a beatnik on the road, like Kerouac and Neal Cassady, barreling down the freeway as fast as you can go¡±. Densmore, meanwhile, finds the depiction of city as a woman a ¡°brilliant metaphor, ¡®Cops in cars, never saw a woman so alone¡¯ ? great stuff. It¡¯s metaphoric, the physicality of the town and thinking of her and how we need to take care of her, it¡¯s my hometown¡±. The ¡°Mr. Mojo rising¡± in the lyrics is often believed to refer to Morrison¡¯s penis: in fact it¡¯s an anagram of Jim Morrison and a name for a voodoo charm widely used in the blues. Whatever one makes of the lyrics, beginning with an automobile noise and building to a driving pace, the song certainly captures the unique atmosphere of a city mythologised by everyone from Frank Sinatra to the Red Hot Chili Peppers.
10 The End
The Doors¡¯ most controversial song was famously used in Francis Ford Coppola¡¯s film Apocalypse Now, to soundtrack the bloody killing of Colonel Kurtz. I¡¯ve ducked the chronological order to include it as the last song of the 10 because it¡¯s hard to imagine it anywhere else ? the Doors themselves generally relied on it to close their shows. The song centres around an Oedipal fantasy, in which the protagonist murders his father and has sex with his mother, the recording of which in near-darkness led producer Paul Rothchild to later describe as the singularly most exciting moment in his studio career. It was long believed that Morrison¡¯s dip into Greek mythology ? via Freud¡¯s Oedipus complex ? was the Lizard King¡¯s way of addressing a troubled childhood under a military father. However, Densmore recalls the singer explaining to him that ¡°kill the father, fuck the mother¡± section was essentially about getting rid of the ¡°alien concepts¡± which society installs in us as human beings. Morrison himself once suggested that the song had a different meaning for him each time he sang it, from the death of childhood innocence to the final curtain. ¡°It¡¯s strange that people fear death,¡± he considered, towards what indeed was the end. ¡°Life hurts a lot more than death. At the point of death, the pain is over.¡± There are several officially released live versions of The End, each of them very different. At New York¡¯s Felt Forum in 1970, a year before his death, Morrison begins it with a blood-curdling cry of ¡°Bring out your dead!¡±, as used by corpse collectors during the Great Plague. I¡¯ve plumped for this 17-minute 1968 Hollywood Bowl version because it¡¯s such a brilliant emotional rollercoaster. With Morrison reputedly high on acid and again singing in near-darkness, there¡¯s humour as the singer spots a grasshopper on the stage, another intriguing diversion as he refers to a fatal accident, some genuinely spooky moments as he foresees his death (wanting to die in an open field, where he can be devoured by worms and snakes) and the musical prowess that made them such a formidable live act. Morrison never got his wish ? instead meeting his demise in a Paris bathtub, aged just 27. The Doors are possibly pop¡¯s ultimate Marmite band, but no one can accuse them of not striving to push the envelope.
The Three Colours Trilogy marked the culmination a decade of collaborations between director Krzysztof Kieslowski and composer Zbigniew Preisner. Their film work is characterised by musical moments which illuminate the story and open up channels of interpretation between the work and the audience. These are cinematic narratives ? as Stanley Kubrick once said of Kieslowski's The Decalogue ? which dramatise ideas, rather than merely talk about them. Preisner's music is central to that process. Here's a few key musical moments to listen out for in Blue, White and Red:
Dozing on a hospital veranda, Julie is startled by a piece of music that will henceforth signify her repressed emotions over the deaths of her husband and daughter: the funeral march first heard at their memorial service. But is this music occurring in her imagination? Or is it streaming at her, like all that blue light, from apparitions occupying the camera's point-of-view and, therefore, her traumatised gaze? When the screen blacks out, we are plunged into her broken world via an unusual cinematic experience: while we are not shown the source of Julie's pain, we cannot escape its sounds.
The first phase of Julie's grief is all about ridding her life of the traces of her losses. She visits a copyist to collect and destroy the manuscript of her husband Patrice's unfinished concerto, Song for the Unification of Europe. Listen to the sounds in the background as the copyist caresses the score. Can you hear an angelic presence on the edge of Jean-Claude Laureux and William Flageollet's meticulous sound design? When the chorus (partly about angels) then erupts, it is all too much for Julie, who bundles up the score and throws it into the jaws of a garbage truck. Listen for the moans of the music as it is eaten, an effect created during editing by slowing down the tape.
The memento theme, a melody "by" Van den Budenmayer Patrice had hoped to weave into the concerto, is looping obsessively around Julie's head when she revisits their family estate. To silence it, she slams a grand piano's lid shut. Blue is punctuated by sonic shocks that echo the opening car crash. But listen beyond the shock of the piano lid and into its jangling aftermath. Is that the wind we last heard at the crash site? We'll certainly hear it again.
Julie blisses out in the park
In Kieslowski's 1991 film The Double Life of Veronique, Veronique pauses in a beam of sunlight and closes her eyes; we imagine the sun's warmth on her skin and feel emotions akin to her bliss. Plunging into Julie's experience has been much more gruelling ? consider how you felt when she scraped her hand along that wall ? but in a Paris park, in the recuperation phase of her grieving, Julie consoles herself with sunshine and a busker's melodies: a syrupy balm which soothes us too, and offers a taste of the healing to come. Julie thus ignores a struggle at the park's bottle bank (a recurring motif in the trilogy). But hang on: is she oblivious to the struggle because she is immersed in the busker's performance or because she is imagining, and thus composing, this music? Have you seen a busker in this scene? Composing will lead Julie out of the worst of her grief.
In the third stage of grieving, Julie re-engages with the remnants of her past through an acceptance of her continuing musical creativity. She helps Olivier declutter his clumsy take on the concerto. Notice how she tweaks the score's cliches to make it sound more feminine (out go the trumpets, in comes the recorder) and make it hers ? the stereotypical femininity reflecting the less liberated role she adopts to fit back into society: another painful loss. Crucially, the two composers share a moment of creative communion, her indifference to other people fading as the images blur. This shot was Preisner's idea: it mimicked how he sometimes composes with one hand held over his eyes. It also looks like a close-up of an eye.
Blue's film-making starts to heal alongside its hero. The audacious closing montage ? "shot as an illustration of the music", according to Kieslowski ? was Preisner's vision. After so much fragmentation and so many shocks, this apparently conventional cinematic trope ? a musical montage ? actually completes an audio-visual theme paralleling Julie's journey through grief: fragmentation yields to continuity, which leads to community. Julie continues to make her own the music she once only edited (if we follow Kieslowski's line on the music's authorship). Yet why this: 1 Corinthians 13, in ancient Greek, with all direct references to God excised? The cuts and emphases of Preisner's setting turn the end of Blue into an ode to agape. This is a Greek word for the kind of love Terry Eagleton defines as "buckling the self to the needs of others", "a ceaseless dying", and perhaps the only authentic "source of a good life" ? a life spent overcoming indifference and making connections with others, but always at a cost.
Echoes of the opening car crash which shatter the continuity of the film, including gunshots, fists pounding doors, smashed plant pots, splashes of water, and the interruptions by the funeral march. There's also the porno music in the sex club, which tells one exactly what to think of Patrice before the big reveal. Look for the way the film gradually finds its flow, with the montage becoming more continuous, as if anticipating the healings and epiphanies of the closing sequence.
The first tune that Miko©©aj hears Karol playing on his hairdresser's comb is an old Polish tango called The Last Sunday. The lyrics concern the threat of suicide over a broken relationship, and so hint at both men's plights. The next melody is a Polish scouting anthem, and the kind of tune once hijacked by the Polish Communist Party for official celebrations. Miko©©aj does not like it, and thus the two men know they can be friends. It's the pigeons who seal the deal, though. Listen out for their literal or metaphysical presence throughout the film.
At the centre of the trilogy lies the single most uplifting moment in all Kieslowski: Karol and Miko©©aj, the latter's suicide aborted, bursting across the frozen river Wis©©a to the swaggering climax of Preisner's tango. "Everything is possible," Miko©©aj exclaims ? but only possible, for him, because Karol has jeopardised his own selfish needs (money he expected to earn by helping Miko©©aj die) for someone else (Miko©©aj and his second chance). The ebullience of this gesture is part story, part cinema: note the contrast of darkness to light, slow motion to speedy skating, eerie scoring to joyous release, and booming gunshot to bombastic tango.
Preisner's tango for White soundtracks Karol's upwardly mobile self-caricature as he embraces the wild frontier of Polish capitalism in the early 1990s. The folksy, dream-of-a-mazurka melody marks the film's moral centre; mazurkas are sometimes danced by couples at traditional Polish weddings. We hear this doleful yet stoic tune at key moments in the story of Karol's relationship with Dominique: their divorce, flashbacks to their wedding, the scene in which he witnesses her adultery in Paris. That last cue then returns, subtly altered and extended, over the film's ending, as Karol spies on Dominique in her Warsaw jail cell and she indicates she wants to remarry him. Her signing also seems to direct Preisner's musical score, which nonetheless ends on a note of ambiguity matching the poise of Karol's face.
Chopin parodied alongside the end of Wajda's Ashes and Diamonds, as Karol is dumped back into a Poland so polluted by capitalism that even its cultural heroes are on the rubbish heap; the music (we've heard it before) buried in the sound design while Karol practises French; Dominique's orgasms (Meg Ryan, eat your heart out), one of which ends in a white-out (equality?) and was orchestrated by Kieslowski, crouched at the foot of a bed, directing Julie Delpy's performance like a conductor.
Originally composed for (and rejected from) the 1991 film At Play in the Fields of the Lord (where it would have accompanied a bombing mission in the Amazon), Preisner's bolero sculpts the dramatic ebb and flow of Red's metaphysical fiction. But the film's two main themes also unveil its principal dramatic conflict: Valentine's climate (beautiful, elegant, naive), and the Old Judge and his younger double Auguste's realm (dark, sexy and troubled). Like the opening of a piano sonata, Red's exposition articulates a tension to be developed, heightened and finally overcome as the trilogy searches for synthesis. Listen out for the interference on Valentine's radio that leads to her hitting the dog. Is this the siren call of the Old Judge's eavesdropping equipment? And how can she be listening to the soundtrack?
Light appears at the Old Judge's command
This is my favourite cue in the trilogy. In the middle of a tense exchange at his house, the Old Judge suddenly tells Valentine to pause and appreciate the light. As if at his command, golden sunlight (like the sun in which Julie basked in Blue) floods the room, along with Preisner's music. The shimmering strings (Preisner makes novel use of tricks learned from Poland's compositional avant garde) conjure an aura of magic, but the spell is complete only when the final note of the chord is supplied by a perfectly pitched telephone. That note, incidentally, is an A, and its placement is typical of the trilogy's fusing of music, sound and moving image to dramatic ends. In Red, one dials A for agape.
Like the return of the funeral march in Blue, Red's reprise of a song last heard in episode nine of The Decalogue ? another story about cuckolding and the relationship between a man and a much younger woman ? was, Preisner believes, the closing gesture of a director calling time on his career. The song's words (revealed publicly in this article for the first time, as far as I know) are by Frederik Willem van Eeden (1860-1932), a Dutch poet. In the poem The Water Lily, the narrator describes an icon of purity, joy and golden light from the perspective of one who knows the passing of time. In Red, Preisner's setting forms the metaphysical glue linking Valentine, Joseph and Auguste. But when the Old Judge stops in his car while listening to the wordless version of the song, and finally sees the huge bubblegum ad starring Valentine, we are invited to take the ad's slogan and perform a weird kind of Kieslowskian karaoke. The slogan reads: En toute circumstance / Fraicheur de vivre (something like "for every occasion / the freshness of being alive"). Fraicheur, though, carries connotations of "bloom". Is Valentine the water lily in Red?
As Joseph and Valentine press hands through the glass of his car window, Preisner signs off the trilogy's dramatic score with a simple yet resonant gesture: three rising notes, A-E-A, and the gist of Valentine's musical climate, now encompassing the Old Judge, too. Moments later, Valentine sees and ? unlike Julie in Blue or Karol in White ? helps someone struggling at a bottle bank. This is the tiny moment of anti-indifference that film critic Dave Kehr calls "a gesture to save the world". Preisner's cue is its musical equivalent: three notes that sing out "a-ga-pe".
Foreshadowing of the planes, helicopters and foghorns that intersect during the trilogy's near-devastating coda. Along with Red's many recurring visual motifs, the build-up of sounds plays an important role in Red's slow-burning cinematic magic.
? Dr Nicholas Reyland lectures on the Music and Film Studies degree programmes at Keele University. His book, Zbigniew Preisner's Three Colors Trilogy: A Film Score Guide, is about to be published by Scarecrow Press and can be pre-ordered from Rowman.com and other online booksellers.
All around me men who had been sleeping soundly seconds before were now throwing on their body armour and helmets and grabbing their weapons and packs. I grabbed my cameras and chased after them while trying to control my breathing, a trick one of the guys had taught me to counter the effects of the massive adrenaline dump that I suffered every time I was woken like this.
A frenetic trip followed, and soon we were driving into a village. I could see other troops setting up a cordon around the perimeter of the settlement. We screeched to a halt outside a walled and gated compound. Following shouted warnings to come out, the gate was kicked in. I knew this was my chance and, before anyone could say different, I took a deep breath and raced in after them.
Through the gate there was an open courtyard, and at the far end there were several dark doorways and windows. I remember thinking that if there were gunmen in there we were in big trouble, but it was too late to back out now. What followed is a haze of doors being kicked in, shouts and lots of running. Every time we turned a corner I expected to meet a hail of bullets, but thankfully not a shot was fired.
Within half an hour, 10 suspected Taliban had been captured. They were then searched, handcuffed - or "zip-locked" - and blindfolded before being led away. As all of this happened I was moving amongst the soldiers, trying to capture the scene without identifying the detainees.
"We got sausage and we got cheese. Happy Thanksgiving!" These were the words of Lieutenant Sweatt to his platoon. Genoa salami, Italian sausage, pepperoni, sweet sausage, provolone cheese, Jarlsberg, cheese nips and pretzels were produced from various bags and shared out. The fare had been hoarded from various care packages, with a large amount coming from Lt Sweatt's grandmother in New Jersey.
With a dirt floor, sleeping cots for seats, the setting was not exactly full of festive cheer, but the soldiers were in high spirits none the less. Some heated the meat on the side of the stove that was filling the tent with smoke, while others wolfed their share down straight from an improvised table. As country and western played from an iPod, the soldiers told stories of Thanksgivings past and speculated on what their families and friends would be doing this year.
"All we need now is some beer and the football on the TV," one sapper said. There was a chorus of approval. Before long, the meal was over and it was back to sandbagging duties for the soldiers.
In the evening, the troops of the camp were called together for a non-denominational Thanksgiving service led by Chaplin Lospanes, a Catholic priest attached to the battalion. Then it was down to the Thanksgiving dinner provided by the US army, with turkey, cranberry sauce and stuffing transported from a forward operating base.
As traditional, the senior officers and non-commissioned officers served the troops and there was plenty to go around. But for the men of Assault and Obstacle Platoon, it ran a poor second to their earlier sausage and cheese Thanksgiving feast in a cold tent, high in the mountains of Afghanistan.
I was shot and the battle around me showed no signs of ending. I realised that, kneeling behind a Humvee, I was still exposed to whoever had just shot me, and so I ran and dived behind a large rock. Well, that's how I remember it. One of the other guys there told me afterwards that there was no running or diving involved. He said: "You half-crawled, half-dragged yourself behind that rock." As I curled into as small a ball as I could, another bullet slammed into the rock, less than two inches above my head. It appeared the sniper wasn't finished with me yet. Then an explosion ripped through the air as a rocket-propelled grenade detonated against the Humvee that I had just abandoned. Close by, three soldiers crouched behind some more rocks. Bullets hammered against their protective boulders, and more cracked overhead.
I could still hear someone shouting to me, telling me everything was going to be OK, but I wasn't convinced. Strangely, the initial pain hadn't been that bad. But I knew as the shock started to wear off the pain would get worse.
Lying behind that rock, I felt more alone than I have ever felt in my entire life. I thought about my girlfriend, and hoped I would see her again, and I worried about how her life would be affected if I died here. As the pain got worse, the fear grew over the extent of my injury and how it might affect the rest of my life. I will admit that, briefly, I wished I had just died straight out from the shot.
Immediately, I pushed that thought away and decided there and then that I was not going to give up. Fuck that sniper, and fuck all these insurgents. I was going to live. I was going to go home and see my girlfriend and my family again. I held on to this thought as the pain increased. God, it hurt.
I can't be sure, but I think I was behind that rock for 10 or 15 minutes before someone finally got to me. Someone ripped open my shirt as I lay on my belly, and I heard them say I had been shot in the kidney. They asked me if I had a field dressing, which I did. He tore it open and pressed it down on the wound, sending bolts of pain shooting into my brain, and then told me I had to get up. I thought he was kidding, and wanted to wait for a stretcher, but it wasn't going to happen and, deep down, I knew it. He rolled me on to my side, grabbed me by the hand and helped me up. I managed to hold on to both of my cameras, although they felt heavier then they ever had before. I was terrified of getting shot again, but I couldn't tell if all the firing around me was outgoing or if we were still getting shot at. He half-dragged, half-pushed me towards a Humvee.
It was chaos when we drove into the base, after a 20-minute drive over what I believe are the worst roads in the world. Humvees and Rangers were parked everywhere, and we were directed between them towards the rear, to the helicopter landing zone. A medic in a flight suit, from the medevac [medical evacuation] helicopter, Staff Sergeant Peter Rohrs, knelt beside me. He talked to me as he checked me out, asking me where I was from and why did I still have a camera in my hands. I asked him how bad it looked, and he said I had a hole in my back about the size of the palm of my hand, but couldn't see any other wounds. He ran his hands up and down my legs and arms, and around my head, looking for other injuries or blood, but found nothing. He asked me if I had any other pain, and I told him my front left lower ribs hurt.
He pulled apart my armour quickly. Then he started cutting my shirt off. He was using the specially designed medic's scissors, but they got stuck at my rolled-up sleeves. Eventually he got through it and when he rolled me over his eyes widened. "Well," he said, "that's why your ribs hurt. You've got another bullet hole in your chest. Looks like the entry wound."
I spent four pain-filled days in intensive care in Bagram. I was visited by a general who handed out purple hearts to soldiers like I'd seen candy handed out to Afghan kids. But there was no medal for me, just a firm handshake and the thanks of the American people for risking my life so that they could know what their soldiers faced. I wish I could have talked more with the general, but I was hit by a new spasm of pain, and he squeezed my hand again and said he'd leave me to rest, as I was obviously having pain-management issues. What an understatement.
After midnight on the fourth day, when I was stable enough to fly, I was loaded on to a cargo plane with other wounded soldiers. We were strapped down to our stretchers, and then locked on to shelving units either side of the fuselage. Like all military planes I have travelled on, this one was utilitarian inside, which meant it really did feel like I was cargo rather than a wounded passenger. The only light was a dim red glow, which added an eerie feel to the whole experience.
Before takeoff, a crew member moved among us handing out air-sick bags. He told me that the takeoff would be tough, because they had to do a combat lift. I'd been through this before, flying in Iraq, and I knew exactly what he meant. The plane takes off and then banks hard, turning in tight circles like a corkscrew, gaining altitude while minimising exposure to rocket attack. It is very tough on the stomach at the best of times, but I had just undergone major internal surgery, and I was dreading the pain if I had to puke. I lay on my elbows, facing down on my stretcher, and I swore to God I wasn't going to be sick.
Landing at the US medical centre in Landstuhl, Germany, I was loaded on to a converted bus, again with apparatus fitted to hold stretchers. It was as though I was in a bad Ikea dream.
In no time at all, I was off the stretcher and in a gleaming room. I had my first hit of morphine for hours, and immediately the pain retreated. And then, like an angel, my girlfriend appeared. The military had informed her I would be arriving in Germany and arranged for her to get visitors' access. With my brother, she had made the trip the night before, and had been waiting since the dawn for my arrival.
I spent nine days in Germany, in the care of amazingly dedicated doctors and nurses. Other patients came and went, with wounds that varied from small shrapnel punctures to multiple amputations. Some of the cases were horrific and heartbreaking, and all the time I felt my amazement grow that I had survived with wounds that should heal completely. And then, as I began to believe everything was going to be OK, there was another blow. A large blood clot was found in the cavity the bullet had left in my abdomen, and suddenly I was being rushed for emergency surgery. Not, though, before the Catholic priest had given me the last rites, which I am sure was meant to be comforting but in fact had the opposite effect.
Finally I flew home to London, where I was immediately admitted into yet another hospital. Here I ran into some good fortune. I had been referred to a British army surgeon, a specialist in gunshot wounds, who was deployed to Afghanistan in 2006. He is a fantastic doctor, and especially supportive because he understands the circumstances I have been through. Unlike other surgeons who predicted 12 to 18 months of recovery, he told me that he would remove and reverse the colostomy as soon as possible.
This lifted my spirits immeasurably, as the sooner I was finished with surgery the sooner I could start regaining my strength properly. He also spent some time talking to me about the ambush, drawing out the smallest detail. He asked me how I was sleeping, if I had any bad dreams or intrusive memories. Not so far, I said, but I have read plenty about the warning signs of post-traumatic stress disorder and will be vigilant.
He sent me home after five days in hospital, and at home I slept a lot. My small reserves of energy evaporated swiftly, and my body demanded rest. My plans to read and write through my convalescence were thwarted. Instead, I struggled to concentrate for more than a few minutes at a time. I was told that this is normal, and as my body recovered from the trauma the need for sleep would subside.
I returned to hospital mid-July, exactly eight weeks after the ambush, to undergo more surgery. This was to reverse my colostomy, and it was successful, though immensely painful, again. My doctor told me that with the right exercise regime, and commitment to it, I would be back on my feet in three or four months. He said it would be tough, and I wouldn't enjoy it, but getting back to work, and Afghanistan, was my motivation.
¡¤ John D McHugh will be writing for theguardian.com while he is in Afghanistan. Read his latest articles or subscribe to his webfeed for videos and photographs.
Seven shootings in a month are being linked to a territorial struggle by armed criminals, culminating at the weekend with what appears to be the accidental killing of a notorious local figure in Meanwood, east Leeds. He died where the bouquets now rest against a concrete wall.
West Yorkshire police believe that Frank Birley, who had been released six months ago from a 14-year sentence for armed robbery and hostage-taking, was killed on Friday night when an accomplice on a "punishment raid" slipped and fired as he fell. A 17-year-old youth was shot in the leg just before Birley was killed and is under armed police protection.
Messages stuck to the flowers in Sugar Well Road where Birley collapsed fatally wounded, refer to him as King of New York - a title taken from the US crime novel and film - and in one case promise: "All will be reveled" (sic).
Birley, who was 33 and also known as Frank Gatt, is thought to have been trying to re-establish his position in Leeds.
He was released from prison after serving nine years for a ¡Ì147,000 armed raid on a Blackpool jewellers which went wrong.
At his trial he was described as violent and dangerous after holding a 78-year-old woman and her 52-year-old daughter at gunpoint during a nine-hour police siege.
A retired engineer, Harry Hemsley, 66, described yesterday how he saw the man thought to be Birley's accomplice run past his drive after the killing.
Mr Birley said he and his wife were seeing visitors into a taxi. "A man came running out of the night waving a gun at me. He just said 'Get out of my way' and went past at what seemed like 100mph. This man wasn't panicking and looked as though he was in control - he could see we were no threat."
The alleged punishment raid on the 17-year-old which led to Birley's death shares a pattern with the previous six shootings. Craig Mirfield, 34, took a single bullet in the head as he tried to escape from a gunman in Gipton last month.
Clifton "Junior" Bryan, 29, was shot in Chapeltown Road. Seven years ago he was under police armed guard, after being ambushed and shot outside St James's University hospital in east Leeds.
Paul Garvin, assistant chief constable of West Yorkshire police, said that the shootings appeared to involve deliberately chosen targets.
Links are also being checked with a gunman's raid on a young couple's house in Seacroft, east Leeds, which left a man with powder burns after a shotgun went off during a struggle, and two shootings on the same day last week, which saw a 23-year-old man suffer minor gunshot injuries. The force's blue and white scene-of-crime tapes meanwhile went up again yesterday after the body of a 36-year-old local man was found slumped in the backyard of the Leeds Rifleman pub in Little London in the inner east end.
Police said that he had died of head injuries and the case was being treated as murder, but postmortem checks have yet to establish if firearms were again involved.
Police are also investigating rumours that a price had been put on Birley's head by one or more rivals who had flourished while he was behind bars.
Inspector Russell Clark said: "I think it's certainly an unusual situation we are dealing with here."
The man accused of the Melbourne car attack is likely to soon face multiple murder charges, with five people dead and at least two still in a critical condition.
On Sunday two more victims of the attack were named as Jess Mudie, 22, and Matthew Si, 33.
Dimitrious ¡°Jimmy¡± Gargasoulas, 26, had surgery on Saturday for a gunshot wound he sustained when police stopped his alleged deadly drive into lunchtime crowds on Friday.
Chief Commissioner Graham Ashton said Victoria police were still waiting for the go-ahead to interview him, and he would face ¡°multiple¡± murder charges as soon as they did.
Three adults and two children, a three-month-old baby and 10-year-old, died when the accused, who was on bail at the time for assault, allegedly deliberately drove into people in the heart of Melbourne.
More than 30 were injured with 13 remaining in hospital on Sunday, at least two of them still fighting for their lives.
¡°They are critical. They¡¯re in a very, very serious condition,¡± the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, told reporters. ¡°The fear is of course that the death toll from ¡¦ will rise.¡±
Thousands of Victorians and visitors laid flowers in Bourke Street on Sunday as families paid tributes to their loved ones.
The Jewish community in St Kilda East held prayers for Thalia and all the other victims, praying for a speedy recovery for the injured.
Federal MP Michael Danby and the local state MP, David Southwick, were there, telling reporters the community was deeply shocked by the tragedy.
Thalia, whose scout troup were also there to pay respects, should have been returning to Beth Rivkah Ladies College in a few weeks, the MPs said.
Si was a devoted husband and a loving father, brother and son, his wife Melinda said in a statement. They had just finished lunch together in the city, and parted to go to their respective offices, when he was struck and killed.
¡°The family would like to thank everyone who helped Matt at the scene and did their best to save him,¡± Si says.
Mudie¡¯s family wrote a tribute letter that was released to media: ¡°To our dearest and most badass daughter and sister, Jess. You are always up to do everything and are such bright bubble of joy. ¡°
Gargasoulas had been driving erratically around Melbourne after allegedly stabbing his brother, who is also in hospital, much earlier that morning.
The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, joined Andrews and laid a wreath at the memorial site on the steps of the old GPO in the mall.
The opposition leader, Bill Shorten, said an ¡°evil, murderous hoon¡± had attacked one of Melbourne¡¯s key landmarks.
A tax deductible fund has been set up to help the families of victims who died as a result of the attack, with the Victorian and federal governments putting in $100,000 each.
A public vigil is being planned for Monday night at Federation Square.
A gunman is at large after two people were killed at Virginia Tech this afternoon, the university said in a statement.
Virginia Tech said the "status of the shooter is unknown" but has warned people on campus to stay inside.
One of the dead men is a police officer who was shot during a "routine traffic stop", the university said.
"Shortly after noon today, a Virginia Tech police officer stopped a vehicle on campus during a routine traffic stop in the Coliseum parking lot near McComas Hall," a statement posted to Virginia Tech's website said.
"During the traffic stop the officer was shot and killed. There were witnesses to this shooting.
Witnesses reported to police the shooter fled on foot heading toward the Cage, a parking lot near Duck Pond Drive. At that parking lot, a second person was found. That person is also deceased."
The statement added: "The status of the shooter is unknown. The campus community should continue to shelter in place and visitors should not come to campus."
Virgina Tech said several law enforcement agencies have responded. Virginia state police are leading the investigation.
A spokeswoman for Virgina Tech confirmed the statement on the website was correct. She was unable to provide further information.
The Collegiate Times, the student newspaper for Virginia Tech, was evacuated from its office as police pursued the gunman. The paper's Twitter feed reported police activity around the campus's Squires Student Center.
AP reported that the shooting came the same day that Virginia Tech, which has an enrollment of about 30,000, was appealing a $55,000 fine by the U.S. Education Department in connection with the university's response to the 2007 rampage, when a student gunman killed 32 students and faculty and then shot himself.
The Collegiate Times reports that the police SWAT team has left Squires Student Center after finding "no suspicious persons inside". The Guardian cannot confirm this.
The Washington Post has a map of the university campus which shows where the deceased were found this afternoon. The police officer was shot and killed at the Coliseum parking lot. A second victim was found at the Cage parking lot, according to the Post.
Unconfirmed reports are suggesting police are hunting a burgundy Mitsibushi in connection with the shooting at Virginia Tech.
Reddit user enginerdy says they are listening into a police scanner feed, and are providing a rolling commentary.
Enginerdy has ascertained from the feed that police have cleared Rector Field House and Johnson Hall. The Guardian cannot confirm his account.
Exams scheduled to take place at Virginia Tech tomorrow have been postponed, according to the university's Twitter feed.
Virginia Tech said a media briefing would be held at Schott Media Room in Lane Stadium at 4.30pm.
An audio stream reportedly picking up communications from police leading the operation at Virginia Tech is available on radioreference.com here.
Just a few minutes ago officers could be heard discussing a possible suspect ? which can be heard in this recording. One officer says:
A response comes through: "Dispatch unit to old sewage plant, see if that's it."
Flickr user daniellinphoto has uploaded photographs from Virgina Tech this afternoon.
Officers can be seen carrying weapons at the campus.
The latest update from Virginia Tech's twitter feed says:
In this second audio grab from the police scanner feed a report comes in of a suspicious male having been spotted two miles west of Virginia Tech.
There is a Heather Drive/ Tall Oaks Drive intersection two miles west of the university campus.
p> On Reddit, enginerdy is continuing to post updates he says are gleamed from a police scanner in the area. The posts make interesting reading and give a sense of a multi-pronged police operation in the area. Police appear to be tracking various leads. There are multiple reports of a suspect wearing a "maroon hoody".
The Republican governor of Virginia, Bob McDonnell, has issued a statement on the shootings at Virginia Tech this afternoon. He says:
I am deeply saddened by today's news of another tragedy affecting the Virginia Tech community. Our thoughts and prayers are with the families of those impacted by these shootings. Since this news first broke we have been monitoring the situation closely and I have made available all requested state resources to Virginia Tech, including the Virginia State Police. I have also spoken to Virginia Tech President Charles Steger earlier this afternoon. I want to thank the multiple law enforcement agencies and all of the officers for their speedy response and focus during this difficult time. I also want to commend Virginia Tech leadership, students, faculty and staff who cooperated to efficiently respond to this emergency. While we will await the completion of the initial investigation of this incident before commenting further, I want to again offer our continued support to all of those impacted by this tragedy. Virginia Tech is a university of great resolve, and I have no doubt that the students, alumni and faculty of this proud institution will emerge from this sad day stronger and more united than ever before. There will continue to be needs in the days ahead as we move forward from this situation and I will ensure that those needs are met completely and fully by the commonwealth.
Law enforcement officials believe the second casualty at Virginia Tech University was the man who shot and killed the campus police officer, according to NBC news.
>NBC's Pete Williams reports that authorities say they're awaiting final confirmation but that they believe the campuswide alert for a gunman at large will soon be canceled.
A weapon has been recovered at the where one of the two dead men were shot, local news station WDBJ7 reports.
Virginia Tech has just announced on Twitter that police on the campus have declared the emergency over.
The Virginia Tech press conference is about to start. You can watch it on the live stream above. You may need to refresh this page.
Larry Hincker, associate vice president for university relations at Virginia Tech, confirms the lockdown at the campus has been lifted.
Charles Steger, president of Virginia Tech, describes a "wanton act of violence", where a police officer was murdered during a routine traffic stop".
He says: "Our hearts are broken again, for the family of our police officer, and we extend our deepest sympathy and condolences."
Gene Deisinger, deputy chief of Virginia Tech police department, says police received a report saying a suspect had been seen approaching an officer and fired a gun. Police responded and found an officer "who had received a gunshot", he says.
At about 1pm an officer saw a suspicious person. When he approached the man, he found him dead from a gunshot wound.
This afternoon police have been following up leads from members of the public.
> Sergeant Bob Carpentieri of Virginia state police is speaking now. The dead officer served on the force for four years.
After the officer was found another body, of a white man, was found near the duck pond on Virginia Tech campus, he says. He had also suffered a gunshot wound.
A gun was also found, but Carpentieri will not discuss the weapon or its calibre. Carpentieri says there have been no further shootings since the two bodies were found.
Carpentieri will not confirm whether police believe the second dead person to be the shooter, and says he does not have the identity of the second dead person.
Deisinger clarifies the information on the second deceased man. Witnesses at the scene of the first shooting reported that the gunman had fled toward the "cage lot". A dead man was later found there.
Asked if the second dead man was the same person who was initially the subject of the traffic stop, Carpentieri says no. The shooter walked up to the officer while he was dealing with the incident.
The press conference is drawing to a close. The only other pertinent piece of information to have emerged is that police had been investigating an armed robbery in nearby Radford yesterday. This WSLS report says the robbery happened at 11.25am in Calhoun Street, at the offices of a real estate agent.
The suspect demanded the keys to an employee's car when he left, described as a 2011 white Mercedes SUV with Virginia tag KLF-6778.
Two people have been killed at Virginia Tech university, leading to a manhunt and campus lockdown. A police officer was shot dead just after midday during a routine traffic stop and a dead man was found with a weapon nearby.
The shootings took place at the same college that was the scene of the deadliest shooting incident by a single gunman in US history. In April 2007 incident, 32 people died when a student, Seung-Hui Cho, went on the rampage. He was able to buy guns despite having been diagnosed with mental health problems.
In today's incident, the dead officer, who had served with Virginia police for four years but has not yet been named, was conducting the traffic stop when witnesses saw another man approach and shoot him. Police said the gunman was not connected with the traffic stop. Witnesses saw the shooter run in the direction of the Cage parking lot.
The gunman was later found dead. About 45 minutes after the first shooting, the police spotted a man acting suspiciously in the Cage parking lot. By the time officers approached him, he was dead from a gunshot wound. The police said they did not shoot him.
A victim of the Tunisia beach massacre was identified by her glittery nail varnish after being shot in the neck and chest, an inquest has heard.
Trudy Jones, 51, from Gwent, south Wales, was holidaying with friends when she was killed.
An inquest at the Royal Courts of Justice in London is to hear evidence in relation to each of the 30 British victims murdered in the atrocity.
Jones is the first victim the inquest heard details about. She had been on holiday with a number of friends, including Carol Anne Powell, when gunman Seifeddine Rezgui killed 38 tourists at the five-star Riu Imperial Marhaba hotel in Sousse on 26 June 2015.
On the morning of her death she had gone for breakfast with Powell, before both women got ready to sunbathe. Jones made her way to the beach while Powell sat by the pool.
In a statement, Powell said: ¡°At around 12 or 12.30pm I heard the most terrible explosion. The explosion came from behind me, towards the beach area. It was the loudest noise you could ever hear.¡±
She added that she initially thought it was an explosion in a beach kitchen, and then crowds of people appeared, running away from the area. ¡°I wanted to run towards the beach to check on Trudy, but people were running towards me shouting ¡®go, go¡¯. I started to run towards the hotel with the crowds of people.¡±
Powell described getting caught up in the chaos and eventually deciding to play dead in a hotel car park. She said a man picked her up and put her on his shoulders ? while she continued to play dead ? before carrying her to the safety of a neighbouring hotel. ¡°I am desperate to find out who he is because he saved me,¡± she said.
In the following days Powell attended the mortuary where the victims¡¯ bodies were being held. Samantha Leek QC, counsel to the inquest, said: ¡°She [Powell] looked at photographs. She initially did not see anyone who looked like Trudy. A couple of hours later she saw a photograph that looked like her.¡±
The inquest heard that Powell was then shown a body which corresponded with that picture. Leek said: ¡°She recognised the glittery nail varnish on her toes.¡±
The court was told a postmortem examination was carried out in Tunisia and another in the UK, where Jones was also identified through dental records. Both gave Jones¡¯s cause of death as a single gunshot wound to the neck and chest.
Powell had also been on holiday with Mark Hornby. Describing how aware he had been of the terror threat in Tunisia, he said: ¡°I did not check the Foreign and Commonwealth Office website as I was not aware of it. The terror risk was not brought to our attention by [holiday company] Thomson.¡±
He added: ¡°I assumed we would be safe on our holiday, especially as the hotel was five stars.¡±
Jones¡¯s family described the carer in a statement to the inquest. They said: ¡°She was a beautiful person inside and out. She would put everyone¡¯s happiness before her own. Making others happy made her happy.¡±
The statement continued: ¡°You only had to meet her once and you would never forget her. She was an amazing lady. The world was a much better place with her in it. Truly one of a kind.¡±
Jones was killed 48 hours before she was due to return home to Blackwood in south Wales.
Killers sideman Tommy Marth has died of an apparent suicide. The saxophonist was reportedly found in his backyard in Las Vegas on Monday morning. "There's a light missing in Las Vegas tonight," the band wrote in a statement. "We lost our friend Thomas Marth."
Performing on the Killers' second and third albums, Marth played a vital role in the group's sonic evolution, helping their spiky indie sound gain an E Street soul. Both of these albums reached No 1 in the UK. Marth also joined the band on their most recent tour, including a featured appearance on the 2009 DVD Live from the Royal Albert Hall. It's not clear whether he performed on the Killers' new full-length album, expected later this year.
Marth was an important member of the Las Vegas music scene, according to the Las Vegas Sun, working at concert venues, as a writer, and with the bands Black Camaro and Halloween Town. "He was one of the most talented people in our community," musician Ryan Pardey told the Sun. "I'm just trying to make sense of things right now and help some people who aren't doing very well."
According to the Clark County coroner, Marth died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head. He was 33.
My uncle, Ronald David Roberts, was the oldest son of Oral Roberts, one of the first televangelists in America. At age 37, Uncle Ronnie was found in a car on the side of a backcountry road, shot dead. He was gay and closeted and, for 10 years now, I have been chasing what few facts remain about the part of his life my family has swept under the rug.
I chase after this private history because I am gay as well and, if I am silent, my family could erase me the way they have tried to erase my uncle.
In the world of my childhood ? spent on a Pentecostal compound in Oklahoma ? my uncle Ronnie was a hothouse flower: the way he laughed; the way he smiled through his beard; his professorial cardigan; his glasses; his pipe.
I remember him the way you might remember the way the sky was lit on a great day 20 years ago: brightly yet faintly. In my sole memory of him, he was sitting in my grandmother¡¯s den, but to my chagrin he wasn¡¯t smoking. I asked him, ¡°Uncle Ronnie, why aren¡¯t you smoking?¡± I was only five years old, maybe six. He laughed: ¡°It¡¯s bad enough I walk into your Munna¡¯s house with this beard, kid. I¡¯m not going to smoke in Munna¡¯s house, too.¡±
That¡¯s all I have: one memory of a man who was dead by the time I was seven.
Last month, I flew to Los Angeles to find what other people who knew him better can still remember. I arrived in Orange County in May with the sky overcast and jacarandas spilling purple flowers onto neighborhood streets. I was visiting Don Pierstorff, a retiree who worked as a teaching assistant with Uncle Ronnie at USC.
My shoulders leaning on the glass patio table in Don¡¯s foyer, my ears were taking in every hard-to-hear word. Don, 82, had his salivary glands, thyroid glands, and part of his cheeks removed due to an illness.
About their life on campus, he said:
Those of us left behind by my uncle agree on a few concrete things.
One: the view below ? the same street where Matt Dillon was shot in the movie Tex ? was one of his last.
Two: he was found dead in a car along the side of a road in Osage County with a .25 caliber gunshot wound to his heart.
We agree he was a brilliant man, fluent in eight languages including Russian, Polish, and Mandarin Chinese. We agree he was prescribed Tussionex for pain and later arraigned in court in February of 1982 for filling multiple prescriptions from too many doctors. He played the flute, beautifully. He served in the military; translated cold war-era Polish code for the NSA. He was the eldest son of one of the world¡¯s first televangelists.
But my family still insists publicly: Ronald David Roberts was not gay.
To muddy the story even more, I have to acknowledge that, for the last five years of his life ? between ages 32 and 37 ? he presented himself as straight. He married a woman and adopted two children. He moved back to his hometown, living only a few miles away from his televangelist father.
Don turned out to be the first man, in 10 years of looking, who¡¯d agreed to talk to me on the record. I¡¯ve been chasing phantoms, trying to pin down real people who would tell me, in the flesh, stories from my uncle¡¯s first life as a gay man ? but no one would.
I¡¯ve often taken out ads on Craigslist in Tulsa and, often, my ads were flagged and removed.
But John Crespin, who spoke with me on the phone in response to a Craigslist ad, told me he went to Circus Disco with my uncle in 1976, said my uncle favored aviator sunglasses. It was all he could remember. John was underage and Uncle Ronnie and his friends snuck him into the club. After yesterday¡¯s attack in Orlando, I hold on to this fact, too: Pulse is a Latin club, like Circus Disco, and my uncle¡¯s presence there feels important because when you are gay, there are so many ways to die.
As for the police report of my uncle¡¯s death, it is missing. Told by the sheriff that it couldn¡¯t be found, I sent a FOIA request and have yet to receive a response. Some of the men who have emailed me over the years say they¡¯re too scared to talk on the record, but they won¡¯t say why.
In 2011, I received another response to my Craigslist inquiry. A message from the void, no name or identifying details: the writer said he knew Uncle Ronnie during the last year of his life:
It¡¯s easy to imagine this is nothing but rural precinct incompetence and southern reticence to speak openly about controversial topics: when we talk about sex and death here in Tulsa, we use nouns such as ¡°fornication¡± and ¡°procreation¡±, phrases such as ¡°to pass on¡±, ¡°to go home.¡±
But it¡¯s also easy to imagine that Oklahoma¡¯s most infamous evangelist didn¡¯t want the homosexual history of his oldest son in the news.
In the late 1980s, my teenage cousin Rachel was lying in a hospital, convinced she was going to die. That was five years after her dad¡¯s death. This is how I remember her description of that time:
I¡¯ve waited 10 years to tell this story: my cousin, later, asked me not to, saying it¡¯s wrong to write publicly about her father¡¯s orientation.
She told me this story when I was coming out and trying to make my way as a newly divorced single father in Oklahoma. She told me this for a reason: that truth had kept her alive. I think she wanted to share the force of it ? the concrete weight of it ? at a time when I needed solid ground most. But her mother, my aunt Carol, kept that secret from her daughter for a reason.
Aunt Carol embraced me when I came out, inviting me over for Christmas and Thanksgiving. She used to gaze at me from across the room (I know now, because so many people have told me, that I look like my uncle, that I carry myself the way he did).
Brokeback Mountain came out the same Christmas I did, in 2005, and I sat between my cousin and my aunt watching what was my uncle¡¯s story, what was my story, what was our story, play out onscreen. Leaving the theater that night, we drove home in silence.
Now that I¡¯ve publicly announced my uncle was gay, Aunt Carol is completely silent: no more invitations to Thanksgiving or Christmas. That embrace had conditions; I broke them. Telling the world that her husband was gay meant betraying her; telling the story above ? my teenage cousin in the hospital, demanding the truth ? is betraying my cousin Rachel, too.
I am not happy, dragging their unwilling names into the light. But stories are ammunition. She spent hers and now I¡¯m spending mine.
When I came out, I didn¡¯t want to know gay history: I wanted to live it for myself. I had lived inside books my whole life ? 31 years! ? and I wanted to live, at last, in my own flesh. I was a new convert to a new faith: faith in my erection, faith in my sweat glands, faith in my fingers, faith in my feet and where they could take me.
I was a Protestant ? a Pentecostal ? in my new faith: fuck dogma. Fuck history. I wanted the Spirit: I wanted the seed of him, the shouting gospel of him, and I got it.
Years later, ready to know from whence I came, I started with Troy Perry, a former Pentecostal. I¡¯d heard that a gay preacher had received a letter from Uncle Ronnie and so, when I first felt ready for my people¡¯s history, I read Troy¡¯s autobiography: The Lord Is My Shepherd, and He Knows I¡¯m Gay.
Troy Perry started the first gay-affirming church in 1969 in Los Angeles: he was a former Assemblies of God minister and, when he came out, he was told he¡¯d never preach again.
This spring, I met Troy and his husband Phillip at a restaurant in Silver Lake and we talked about my grandfather, Oral. Troy heard him preaching back when Troy was in the closet, sometime in early 1960s LA:
I, like my uncle before me, am not religious, but I haven¡¯t lost my faith. I believe in things ? concrete things, things with weight attached to them ? and I believe in things like the weight of my uncle¡¯s story.
Before I came out, I slept with many men. The second man, a college tennis player for Southern Nazarene University, used to call me, often, to tell me how much better it was on the other side. I would roll my eyes: I was married with children. I wasn¡¯t gay. I liked fucking him but it was just a thing. ¡°Gay¡± was a commitment. ¡°Gay¡± was a conversion. ¡°Gay¡± was music I was supposed to like and didn¡¯t, people I was supposed to act like, and didn¡¯t.
Once, walking to the gym downtown, a gay man called me out: ¡°Honey, could you spare me a dollar, I need some food¡± ? I cut him off quickly, mortified, shaking my head no. ¡°Oh, sorry, honey, I thought you was family ? I was sure you were a sister!¡±
Coming out in Oklahoma is a conversion: its attendant testimony, catechisms, and shibboleths have weight, gravitas. They sink in. We Oklahoma queers can¡¯t speak English without the influence of the King James Version; we can¡¯t talk about sex or coming out without using the words we heard in church.
For us especially, coming out is a conversion to a new faith ? one that, for most Christians in Oklahoma, requires you leave Jesus behind.
Coming out, we¡¯re family: growing up in the church, I¡¯d watched men refer to other Christian men as their brothers.
Coming out, I am now greeted by gay men as their sister, often with a holy kiss.
It has been the privilege of my family to tell my Uncle Ronnie¡¯s life in a short, easy paragraph:
It is the privilege of those with power to tell us who we are. It has been the privilege of heterosexuals to tell transgender men and women what constitutes gender, to corral the tools of scientific inquiry and subject subjective flesh and bone to its will: ¡°You are a man. You are a woman. You two, and only you two, were meant to marry, were meant to fuck.¡±
Armed with facts ? artifacts, photographs, testimony ? it is now my privilege to tell that power to fuck off.
Denied the cross, we Oklahoma queers bear the weight of all the stories the straights refuse to tell. We tell these stories because: it¡¯s the only ground we have. After his sailor died, Uncle Ronnie married a woman, moved back to Tulsa, and adopted two children.
As far as I can tell, the pain of that first loss: with him until the end.
We tell our stories because, for us queer folk, telling is a matter of life and death. When we didn¡¯t tell them, we died. Life demands it: represent.
This essay is adapted from Book VI of The Bible Went Down With the Birdie Jean, a reported memoir that will include interviews, essays, and poetry accompanying 300 photographs on Instagram in Fall 2016; you can follow the account now: @thebirdiejean.
Late in the evening on Wednesday 31 August, gunshots were fired in the centre of Christiania, Copenhagen¡¯s semi-autonomous freetown. Three people were injured, including one police officer, who remains in critical condition. The gunman ? a 25-year-old Dane who was later shot and killed by the police ? is believed to have been involved in Christiania¡¯s hash trade.
Cannabis has long been sold and enjoyed in this unique neighbourhood, a famous utopian commune in the heart of Denmark¡¯s capital. Historically a centre of freedom and resistance, it will celebrate on Monday the 45th anniversary of the day that squatters ? known as slumstormerene ? broke down the barricades of an abandoned military base, creatively activating disused spaces in a time when living conditions were poor. In 1973, the Social Democratic government gave Christiania the official temporary status of ¡°social experiment¡± ? a term that many criticised as its residents had not agreed to participate. Nonetheless, this ruling allowed Christiania to persist, and a majority vote in parliament in 1989 set the Christiania Law in stone, legalising the squat.
Stroll beyond ¡°downtown¡± Christiania, with its bars, cafes, shops and performance venues, and you¡¯ll stumble across the things that make the community unique. Residents have renovated old barracks, adapting them into practical spaces such as houses, kindergartens, workshops and cafes; they have built their own avant garde homes; and in the birthplace of the iconic Christiania cargo bike, the streets are completely void of cars.
The community also has its own social services in cooperation with the municipality, known as Herfra og Videre (Onwards and Upwards), as well as a health centre. With the exception of schools, hospitals and social services, Christiania likes to do things its own way. It has established a self-administrating system that spends 29m kroner (¡Ì3.3m) annually on maintaining common property, kindergartens, sewers, recycling and waste collection.
Drug use was always a part of the community. In recent years, however, the cannabis trade has evolved. Once led by small-time dealers, it is now controlled by large, multinational organisations, including the Danish branch of the Hell¡¯s Angels, who are neither residents nor employees of Christiania.
¡°This transition has happened over many years,¡± says Risenga Manghezi, a community spokesperson who has lived in Christiania for seven years. ¡°In the last 10 to 15 years, the police have been really hard on Pusher Street. This means the softer ¡®mom-and-pop shops¡¯ have disappeared, and it¡¯s only the ones who are most willing to take risks and manipulate Christianites who have stayed.¡±
Recent figures from the Copenhagen police estimate that between up to 1bn kroner (¡Ì115m) changes hands each year in Pusher Street.
¡°Today you have pre-rolled joints, different types of hash,¡± says Manghezi. ¡°It¡¯s all very systemised and there is a lot of money going through there.¡±
In this otherwise semi-autonomous and socially minded community, a capitalist-style ¡°drugs supermarket¡± had developed, and was spinning out of control ? culminating in the recent shootout. ¡°This was something most of us knew could happen,¡± Manghezi says. ¡°It¡¯s not the first time somebody¡¯s been shot in Christiania. But I¡¯ve always thought that the day a police officer gets shot, that¡¯s the day things will get really bad.¡±
Indeed, the next evening, roughly 400 of Christiania¡¯s 700 adult residents gathered in the community¡¯s meeting space. The democratic process in Christiania is based on a consensus mechanism, and cannabis sellers are often present at community meetings: to have a hash stall in Christiania, you must be a resident.
Some gangs, however, have manipulated locals into acting as a front for their trade. Their presence at meetings, Manghezi laments, makes it difficult to build momentum to change the way Pusher Street is run. But this time it was clear something drastic would happen: by the end of the meeting, residents had decided to demolish all stalls in the ¡°cannabis supermarket¡± and reclaim the area from outside dealers.
¡°The whole vibe around Pusher Street has really sucked a lot of the energy out of Christiania. This has been a wakeup call for what we have here,¡± says Manghezi. ¡°Police confrontation around Pusher Street has halted a lot of the great things that could go on. I hope that what we¡¯ve done will now release some new energy so we can focus on the cool things happening.¡±
Since the stalls were destroyed, the atmosphere is noticeably different: pop-up community meals have taken place, and there is talk of plans for a fountain. There have always been a lot of positive lessons to learn from this alternative urban enclave. The community continuously experiments with green building techniques, stormwater management, solar energy and water-treatment systems to reduce their ecological footprint. Christiania¡¯s creativity and experimentation has always existed, but the presence of Pusher Street has dominated the focus. ¡°It has made people sort of not talk about the social experiment,¡± says Manghezi. ¡°It¡¯s given the general feeling that things we do here are illegal ? they really aren¡¯t!¡±
This freedom to experiment is at the core of Christiania¡¯s principles. When resident and archivist Ole Lykke first moved to the freetown in 1979, he says, ¡°you¡¯d have a good idea, you¡¯d go ahead with it, and if somebody complained, you¡¯d deal with it. If not, then you¡¯d just go ahead.¡±
But in 2011, their principles were threatened when the Danish government insisted that Christiania either purchase the land or be bought out. Because of Christianites¡¯ rejection of property rights, the prospect of ownership was unappealing. So they set up a foundation to buy the land. Many supporters of the commune jumped at the chance to ¡°buy a little share of freedom¡±, more than 12.5m kroner was raised, a mortgage was secured and Christiania was saved.
The mortgage payments rise every year, but this ¡°rent¡± is immensely cheaper than the rest of central Copenhagen ? giving Christiania ¡°the perfect elements for gentrification¡±, says Manghezi. Autonomous or not, Christiania faces the same challenges as many inner-city neighbourhoods when it comes to the pressures of market forces.
Just across the water, in an area known as Papir©ªen (Paper Island), a former paper factory is being colonised by a food market, a gallery and design offices, preparing the area for transformation into a luxury development. Furthermore, the city¡¯s ¡°kissing¡± bridge finally opened this summer, linking up colourful Nyhavn harbour to Christiania via the likes of the famous high-end restaurant Noma and the city¡¯s opera house. As the land around it grows more expensive, how will this more de-commodified space continue to thrive while staying true to its values?
¡°When Christiania started, there was nothing around here,¡± says Lykke. ¡°If you were coming to the area, you either came here or to the ship-building factory, which closed down in 1986. If Christiania hadn¡¯t started in these old military barracks, most of this area would¡¯ve been torn down. Then they would¡¯ve built concrete houses that probably would¡¯ve been torn down by now. We saved this area, and have made an attraction in the city.¡±
Indeed, with up to a million annual visitors, Christiania is the Danish capital¡¯s second most popular attraction. ¡°Copenhagen needs grassroots movements like Christiania because they add new dimensions and dynamics to our culture and urban life,¡± says the city¡¯s mayor, Frank Jensen. ¡°The city needs to make room for people that give Copenhagen the edge and contributes to making it stand out, nationally and internationally.¡±
It is increasingly clear, however, that combating the illicit drug trade is key to ensuring Christiania¡¯s survival. In a recent ¡°landmark¡± agreement, residents agreed to let police install video surveillance. And Christiania is now urging cannabis customers to buy their drugs elsewhere.
As the smoke of the gang-dominated hash industry clears, will Christiania still hold the same attraction it once did?
¡°We cannot allow for the cannabis market to keep funding organised crime,¡± says Jensen. ¡°We need to find a lasting solution to this problem ¡¦ I think a carefully controlled legalisation would be a better way to regulate the cannabis market than the current prohibition.¡±
As Ole Lykke watches Christiania¡¯s last hash stall being crane-lifted on to the back of a truck, on its way to Copenhagen City Museum to memorialise this latest chapter in a unique community¡¯s 45-year story, he considers the implications of what he¡¯s seeing. ¡°The next steps depend on the narcotics politics of Denmark,¡± he says. ¡°We¡¯re really writing history here.¡±
Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter and Facebook to join the discussion
Seven Cuban migrants, all with gunshot wounds, were interdicted at sea and taken to south Florida hospitals.
The wounded Cubans were found Saturday afternoon, according to the Keynoter.
The US coast guard¡¯s public affairs office told the newspaper the wounded were on a makeshift raft with another 19 migrants, who were not injured.
The migrants who do not need medical attention will likely be repatriated. The injured were taken to Lower Keys medical center on Stock Island. Six were airlifted to Miami trauma centers.
Earlier this year, authorities said Cuban migrants desperate to reach US shores were increasingly violent and noncompliant with coast guard crews who detained them at sea, citing reports of attempted poisoning and self-inflicted wounds as rumors swirl that the ¡°wet-foot, dry-foot¡± policy will soon be abandoned.
Last week, a cruise ship rescued 18 migrants on board a 30ft boat, and found that nine migrants had died on the ship while trying to make the 130-mile crossing from Cuba to Florida. About 8,000 Cuban migrants have become trapped in Costa Rica in the last year as well, unable to cross legally through Central America to the United States, though a small number have acquired visas and chartered flights.
Since relations between the US and Cuba began to thaw in December 2014, thousands more Cubans have been attempting the harrowing journey on makeshift boats or through the deserts and jungles of Central America. Last week, Barack Obama met with Cuban president Raul Castro in Havana, a symbolic high point of the rapprochement between former enemies, but also a sign to many Cubans that it will become more difficult to find political asylum in the US.
The coroner at Catterick in North Yorkshire has been given a police report on the death last month of Derek McGregor, who is believed to have left a note alleging that he had been beaten up but could not get his superiors to act.
His death brings to seven the number of soldiers found hanged since 1995 at Catterick. Six others have died of gunshot wounds. The army describes the toll as "13 deaths too many" but is waiting until the results of the current police inquiry into four soldiers' deaths at Deepcut barracks, Surrey, before making a decision on whether to hold an inquiry.
Lance Corporal McGregor was a medical technician with the 3rd Close Support Medical Regiment, one of scores of units which rotate periods of service at the base, on the plain of York. Catterick is home to 8,600 troops and takes a further 15,000 a year at its infantry training centre.
His parents are expected to tell an inquest called by the North Yorkshire coroner, Geoff Fell, this year that their son, who served in Northern Ireland and Germany, had experienced severe problems before he was posted to Catterick. He was allegedly beaten up in Northern Ireland by other personnel, and then attacked outside Catterick a week before he died. He had only been at the Yorkshire base for three weeks.
Unofficially, the army is understood to be confident that the deaths related to Catterick have all had individual and different causes. If an inquiry were held, the total over eight years would be compared with the toll at similar large institutions and the population at large.
Catterick's former hospital is now a psychiatric unit, and the garrison also has a specialised unit, Williams Company, which nurses troops with physical injuries back into service.
An army spokesman said: "We are very conscious of our duty of care. There is a well-established system to watch out for any soldier experiencing problems, and each inquest has gone into the circumstances thoroughly.
"Unfortunately, regrettable as the whole incident is, we cannot comment on Lance Corporal McGregor's death until the coroner has held his inquest. As far as calls for a wider inquiry are concerned, we are waiting to see what the police have to say about Deepcut."
McGregor's father Derek, who lives in Blackpool, said an independent inquiry was needed. The soldier's mother, Elizabeth McManus, who is divorced from Mr McGregor and lives in Motherwell, said she had only just discovered details of the allegations about her son's death, and was too distressed to comment.
Flora Carr is an English student at the University of Exeter, where she is features editor of the student newspaper. She won the ELLE Talent Contest 2014. You can follow her on Twitter here
An annual clean-up in the grounds of Surrey¡¯s Deepcut army barracks, at around the time 18-year-old Pte Cheryl James died, recovered at least 800 used contraceptives.
That showed the highly sexualised, alcohol-fuelled and, it was alleged, toxic environment that James and other teenage recruits, most away from home for the first time, were plunged into. Though sexually mature, their emotional stability could not be taken for granted.
But the army ? acting in loco parentis ? thrust a loaded rifle into James¡¯s hands and dispatched her on lone armed guard duty, in direct contravention of its own regulations.
The lacklustre investigation 20 years ago has made it impossible to demonstrate beyond doubt exactly how James died from a gunshot wound to the head while posted at the Royal Way gate on the morning of 27 November 1995.
Was it self-inflicted? Certainly the army offered any vulnerable recruit alone with a weapon the perfect opportunity for suicide. Basic policing failures doomed her family to wonder, until at a second inquest, the coroner ruled that she had killed herself.
The body of the popular, ¡°bubbly¡± teenager was found under a tree a short distance from the gate. Lying on her right side and wearing military camouflage, she was found with her beret at her feet, her SA80 rifle beside her, and a gunshot wound to the face.
¡°She had such luxurious brown hair and it was so sad to see her lying there,¡± remembers paramedic Nigel Roberts.
The post-cold war army in which James had enlisted six months earlier was restructuring and reducing its numbers. Recent key changes included both sexes and groups of under- and over-18s being trained together.
Staff shortages meant Deepcut¡¯s ratio of corporals to trainees was 1:100, and at night up to 1:200. Supervision was lax. Though up to one third of the 500 trainees were women, there were just two female officers, both away at the time of James¡¯s death.
Alcohol flowed freely at the base, the inquest heard, even for 16- and 17-year-olds. Drunken parties in empty accommodation blocks were, it emerged, part of the camp¡¯s social life.
One informant described Deepcut as being run by the recruits and ¡°out of control¡±, saying every evening was like ¡°Glasgow or London on a Saturday night¡±.
¡°[There was] a party atmosphere and alcohol,¡± the source said. ¡°Sex would be everywhere.¡±
James ? attractive, vivacious and up for a laugh ? had many admirers, but was torn between two men: Jim Carr-Minns, a Royal Engineers recruit from a nearby base; and Paul Wilkinson, like James a Royal Logistical Corps trainee based at Deepcut.
James was trying to choose between them at the time, the inquest heard. Shortly before her death she had argued with Wilkinson, who had visited her while she was on guard duty at the gate that morning. She had rowed with friends, too, who had urged her to choose.
Those in positions of responsibility abused their power, the inquest heard. Sexual relations between recruits and training staff, who saw the female trainees as a sexual challenge, was a ¡°consistent and persistent¡± feature at Deepcut, according to one review. Sex was ¡°a passport for getting off duties, getting a long weekend home¡±, one female private confided.
James had been chased round a locked room by a sergeant who ¡°tried to have his way with her¡± while on a driving course away from Deepcut, leaving her ¡°visibly upset and shaken¡±, according to fellow trainee Jane Worboys. The incident was not reported. ¡°We didn¡¯t know who to report it to,¡± Worboys said. ¡°There was no one approachable.¡±
Another former soldier alleged James had been ordered to have sex with another recruit, but that was strenuously denied at the inquest.
The scale of bullying and inappropriate sexual behaviour at Deepcut is borne out by allegations later made to Surrey police. By 1995, there had been 80 allegations, including that a senior officer indecently assaulted a female trainee, that a female recruit was made to run naked as a punishment, that two female trainees were indecently assaulted while babysitting for a senior officer, while one woman claimed she had sex with an officer because she was too frightened to refuse.
A further 38 allegations made between 2001 and 2002 included two of rape. Informal and unrecorded punishments were doled out by troop sergeants, including extra guard duties, it was claimed.
Given the dossier of evidence and allegations, Brig John Donnelly, the army¡¯s head of personal services, agreed at the inquest that the atmosphere at Deepcut was ¡°highly sexualised¡± and that sexual activity was ¡°part of the core of every day life, almost¡±.
The MoD has since acknowledged that there was no effective channel for complaints against instructors, and the system for raising concerns about bullying was ¡°of limited effectiveness¡±. As Donnelly conceded, the army ¡°did not have the structures in place to provide proper duty of care¡±.
Some felt James was picked on, perhaps for not reciprocating the advances of officers. ¡°She didn¡¯t care about the army, and I don¡¯t think she felt the army cared about her,¡± her friend and former trainee Helen Miller told the inquest. She told others she wanted to go Awol.
Boredom among phase-two recruits, who had completed training but were given menial tasks and guard duty while waiting for a posting, fostered low morale. ¡°I remember having to sweep up leaves and other irrelevant tasks,¡± former trainee Nicola Clifford recalled.
It is legitimate to question how this environment might have contributed to the death of a teenage girl with a tangled private life, who was posted on lone guard duty with a weapon after having had just four hours¡¯ sleep due to a party the previous night.
The fact James¡¯s death was classified as sudden meant that Surrey police officers were given the lead role in the investigation. It was also the second such death in five months at the barracks; Pte Sean Benton, 20, died from five gunshot wounds in June 1995.
However, the early assumption that James had taken her own life meant the investigation was instead handed to the military¡¯s special investigation branch.
The scene was not protected, no ballistics tests were conducted ? which could have established the distance from which James was shot ? and her rifle was back in service within months. No tests were conducted on black marks, seen in photographs, or to establish the presence of gun residue, dirt or bruising. Police were also criticised for failing to follow up any potential suspects.
It was not until 2002 ? seven years after James died, and after two further deaths by gunshot of young recruits at Deepcut ? that Surrey police reinvestigated. By then, however, the lack of of forensic evidence, even after James¡¯s body was exhumed in 2015, had made it impossible to determine beyond doubt if she had pulled the trigger herself. The coroner¡¯s ruling on Friday dispelled that doubt.
A Chicago man was shot and killed while live streaming a video on Facebook, police said on Friday, just days after a double homicide in France in which the killer later took to Facebook Live to encourage more violence.
Antonio Perkins, 28, was found face down on Wednesday night in a vacant lot with gunshot wounds to the neck and head on the city¡¯s west side, Chicago police officer Laura Amezaga said.
Perkins was taken to a hospital where he was pronounced dead. Police on Friday identified the man in the video as Perkins, who they said was a documented gang member. No arrests have been made.
In France, a 25-year-old man killed a French police commander and the commander¡¯s partner on Tuesday, then he took to Facebook Live with a 12-minute video encouraging followers to kill prison staff, police officials, journalists and lawmakers.
The incidents underscore the immense challenges companies such as Facebook, Twitter and Google¡¯s YouTube face as they push live video streaming to hundreds of millions of people.
Facebook in recent months has made its Live feature ? which allows anyone to broadcast a video in real time ? a central component of its strategy. It allows people to stream from their smartphone.
Chicago, the third-largest US city, has drawn attention due to its gun violence, which police have blamed largely on gang violence and a proliferation of stolen guns. There were nearly 500 homicides last year, and gun violence is up in 2016, police say.
The Facebook Live video appears to show Perkins recording himself and a group of people in front of a row of homes before someone opened fire. The phone appears to tumble through bloody grass before going black. The audio continues with bystanders screaming and crying.
The video remains on Facebook with a user warning message about its graphic nature.
A spokeswoman from Facebook acknowledged the video posting, saying it does not violate company policy. The social media site will remove a video if it celebrates or glorifies violence, she said.
Surrey police failed to properly investigate and eliminate three potential suspects in their original investigation into the death of army recruit Cheryl James at Deepcut barracks, an inquest heard, as an army brigadier apologised to her family for army failings in looking after her.
Two privates and another unnamed male were listed as hypothetical suspects in a police report in 2002, seven years after James, 18, died from a single gunshot wound to the head while on lone guard duty at the controversial Surrey barracks in 1995.
The names of ¡°Pte Minns¡± (Jim Carr-Minns, who the inquest heard was James¡¯s boyfriend at the time ) and ¡°Pte Wilkinson¡± (Deepcut colleague Paul Wilkinson) were read out at the inquest by Alison Foster QC, counsel for James¡¯s parents.
Foster told the hearing a 2002 ¡°paper review¡± by Surrey police of its investigation said the two should be interviewed further to ¡°confirm or disprove¡± any involvement.
The QC read aloud the report¡¯s recommendations that: ¡°Pte Minns should be considered a suspect and should be interviewed immediately to confirm or disprove his involvement in the death of Pte James. Pte Wilkinson should be considered a suspect and should be interviewed immediately to confirm or disprove his involvement in the death of Pte James.¡±
A further review of the Surrey police investigation, Operation Stanza by Devon and Cornwall police, said in 2005 that Pte Wilkinson should be interviewed as a potential suspect, and it criticised the Surrey force for an ¡°insufficient investigation¡± to identify an unknown male ¡°who could potentially have been a suspect¡±, Foster told coroner Brian Barker QC, sitting at Woking coroner¡¯s court.
James, from Llangollen, north Wales, was one of four young army recruits to die at Deepcut between 1995 to 2002. She was on lone armed guard duty when her body was found in a small copse near the barracks gates with a bullet wound to the head.
In the 2002 ¡°paper review¡±, which triggered a reinvestigation of the four deaths, it was noted there was no exit wound, an apparent lack of blood on the ground, she was lying in a foetal position with a branch across her face and the hood of her waterproof jacket covering her face.
The review, said Foster, stated ¡°any one of those indicators would not cause suspicions¡± but collectively ¡°they ask questions about the manner of Pte James¡¯s death¡±. It stated: ¡°No consideration appears to have been given that the scene as found might have been contrived¡±.
Foster said it concluded there was ¡°substantial evidence¡± to suggest the ¡°mindset of a majority of key figures¡± involved was that James had killed herself.
James had written to her childhood friend Lydia Baksh about meeting her boyfriend, fellow squaddie Jim Carr-Minns, and was serious about him, the inquest heard. But she had also confided in friends she had kissed another man.
James¡¯s father Desmond told the hearing he had been told by Surrey police that Wilkinson had argued with James shortly before her death.
Baksh said James was ¡°desperate to leave the army¡±. ¡°She was being reprimanded all the time and being put on guard duty a lot, which she just couldn¡¯t bear.¡± In one letter she wrote she was thinking of going ¡°AWOL¡± ? absent without leave.
The inquest heard senior officers at Deepcut at the time were handing out guard duty to trainees either as punishment or to prevent them leaving the camp. ¡°That was an abuse of power?¡± Bridget Dolan, counsel for the coroner, asked Brig John Donnelly, the army¡¯s head of personal services.
Donnelly, who was not involved with Deepcut at the time but is giving evidence on army policy in 1995, agreed that it was not recognised at the time of James¡¯s death that this was happening at Deepcut.
He said the risks of putting relatively inexperienced trainees on armed guard duty were not recognised. ¡°We did not fully recognise the risk of having people with relatively little experience, and we took too long to recognise that and we owe Mr and Mrs James an apology for that¡±.
Donnelly also agreed with Dolan¡¯s suggestion that ¡°sexual activity was part of the core of everyday life, almost¡± at Deepcut at the time.
A white five-year diary, which James had been given by her parents, was never found after her death. Her mother, Doreen, said James was an avid diary writer up until joining the army, and she believed her daughter would have continued writing after she was in the army. But the white diary, with flowers and a matching photograph, was never returned with her other possessions, though the photograph was. ¡°I have always thought it strange that this diary has never been found,¡± she said in a statement.
The inquest, which is due to last seven weeks, was ordered after the High Court quashed the open verdict recorded at the original inquest held just three weeks after James¡¯s death.
A massive saltwater crocodile ? said to be one of the biggest ever seen in Queensland ? has been found shot dead and experts fear its demise could lead to other crocodiles becoming more aggressive as young males fight for supremacy.
Police and state environmental officers are investigating after the 5.2-metre male reptile was found with a bullet in its head in the Fitzroy river in Rockhampton on Thursday.
The crocodile was taken to the nearby Koorana crocodile farm, where it will be buried once a necropsy is carried out. Farm owner John Leaver said a five-metre crocodile had not been caught in Queensland for 20 to 30 years.
¡°There may have been some others shot in the wild that we don¡¯t know about, but from my recollection, over the past three decades this would be the largest,¡± he said on Friday.
Leaver, who ran a crocodile removal service across the state for 20 years, said the largest one he ever caught was 4.95m in the late 1980s. ¡°We caught that one up near Airlie beach [in Queensland],¡± he said.
Leaver said it was not unusual for a crocodile of that size to be found so far south. The farmer said Rockhampton locals used to shoot crocodiles ¡°equal to that size¡± in the 1930s, 40s and 50s, before it was illegal.
It is believed the 5.2m reptile had been dead for a few days before a member of the public spotted it floating and notified environmental officers.
Leaver said the gunshot had caused a large hole in the top of the saltwater crocodile¡¯s skull, suggesting the bullet came from a ¡°fairly large-calibre rifle¡±.
¡°I would say that someone felt very threatened,¡± he said, when asked why he thought it had been shot.
Michael Joyce, southern wildlife operations director at Queensland¡¯s Department of Environment and Heritage Protection, said the remaining male crocodiles could act differently and become more hostile as they establish who will rule next.
¡°They don¡¯t necessarily become more aggressive with outsiders,¡± Joyce said on Friday. ¡°But we would expect people to be croc-wise in croc country and be extra vigilant.¡±
Joyce said wildlife officers would monitor the river to see what transpires and who becomes the next dominant male. ¡°The whole thing could be over in 24 hours; at other times it could take months to see a slight move in the population,¡± he said.
Joyce said it was estimated to be between 80 and 100 years old.
¡°It is on the larger end of the scale, there¡¯s no doubt about that,¡± he said. ¡°There are not a lot of crocodiles over five metres.¡±
People are being urged to notify the department of any crocodiles spotted in the river and elsewhere across Queensland, even if they are seen regularly.
Cassius, a male caught in the Northern Territory three decades ago, is recognised as the world¡¯s largest crocodile in captivity. It measures 5.48m and lives at a farm on Green Island in far north Queensland.
A 6.16m Philippine crocodile called Lolong held the record until it died in 2013.
A photographer for an investigative magazine who fled his home state after being harassed has been found dead in Mexico City along with other people.
The body of Ruben Espinosa, who collaborated with Proceso magazine and other media, was identified by a family member at the morgue on Saturday afternoon, the magazine reported, adding that he had two gunshot wounds.
Espinosa had recently gone into exile from the Gulf coast state of Veracruz, where he felt under threat, according to Proceso. His family had lost contact with him on Friday and by Saturday the free speech advocacy group Article 19 had called on Mexican authorities to activate the protocols for locating a missing journalist.
He was found dead with four women, three of whom lived in the apartment in the middle-class Narvarte neighborhood near the centre of the city, according to the Mexico City prosecutor¡¯s office. The fourth woman was a domestic employee, the prosecutor¡¯s statement said. It said identifications and cause of death were still being verified.
Veracruz has been a dangerous state for reporters. According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, 11 journalists have been killed there since 2010, all under governor Javier Duarte, the most recent just a month ago. Two others, including Espinosa, were Veracruz journalists found dead outside of the state.
Article 19 said the killing of Espinosa marked a new level of violence against journalists in Mexico, as he was first to be killed while in exile in Mexico City. Many reporters under threat in their home states have taken refuge in the capital, where the federal government has set up an agency to help such journalists.
The advocacy group said in an article that the killing occurred ¡°without authorities charged with protecting journalists lifting a finger to help Espinosa¡±.
Article 19 said it published an alert about Espinosa on 15 June after he reported unknown people following him, taking his photograph and harassing him outside his home in Xalapa, the capital of Veracruz.
On 12 July 2008, Ben and Catherine Mullany shared a "truly perfect day" as they were married in front of family and friends at St John the Evangelist church, in Cilybebyll, south Wales. Just over a month later they were buried in the grounds of the same church after falling victim to the violent crime that belies Antigua's reputation as a holiday island.
The couple spent their first night as man and wife camping in an unknown location ? something which was hinted at by choosing the song Somewhere Only We Know, by Keane, as their first dance.
Two days after their nuptials they flew to Antigua for a two-week honeymoon that should have been a dream holiday.
Their friends and family had paid for their stay at the Cocos Hotel overlooking Jolly Beach ? a picture-postcard Caribbean vista of turquoise ocean, white sand and palm trees that gently tilt in the breeze. On 27 July, the last night of their honeymoon, their idyll was shattered. After having dinner in the hotel restaurant they returned to their luxury chalet. At around 5am Kaniel Martin and Avie Howell entered cottage 15 and shot Ben and Catherine Mullany, both 31, in the back of a head with a stolen handgun at close range. As the couple lay dying on the floor, they stole two inexpensive mobile phones, a cheap digital camera and a small amount of money before making their escape. Detective Superintendent Keith Niven, of the Metropolitan police, who led the British team called on by the Antiguan authorities to help with the investigation, said he was convinced Martin and Howell's main aim had been to kill first ? and robbery was a secondary intention.
The shots were heard by other holidaymakers and the newlyweds were discovered by an American nurse. Catherine Mullany died instantly after being shot but the nurse tried to stabilise Ben Mullany before the arrival of paramedics. He was initially conscious but slipped into a coma and was taken to Holberton hospital, near St John's, where he was placed on a life-support machine. He had a fractured skull and a bullet lodged in the back of his head. On 1 August the student physiotherapist was flown back home to south Wales where he was treated at Morriston hospital in Swansea, where his wife, a doctor, worked. Despite the best efforts of the clinical team, a week after the attacks Ben Mullany was declared dead.
As Antigua sought to limit the damage to the island's "paradise" reputation and called in Scotland Yard detectives to assist in the investigation, Martin and Howell, aged 20 and 17 respectively at the time and nicknamed "Sample Dan" and "Demon", struck again in similar fashion. After breaking into the shop of local woman Woneta Anderson, they shot the 43-year-old at close range. After stepping over her bloodied body, they ran off taking two mobile phones and a handful of top-up cards. It was the murder of Walker that led police to the killers. A bandana with Howell's DNA was found at the scene as well as a blood-stained footprint. While the murder weapon was never found, tests later showed the bullets in all three killings came from the same gun. Gunshot residue was later found on Martin and Howell's clothing as well as in a gun holster found at Martin's home.
Twelve hours after the honeymoon couple were shot, Howell had inserted his sim card into Ben Mullany's phone. And the voice of his close friend Martin was found on the stolen Nokia. The item was later sold to a woman for around $200 (¡Ì122) by a man standing opposite Martin's family home in Golden Grove. It remains unclear who shot the couple, as both killers refused to explain their actions all the way through their eight-week trial. The pair were eventually convicted the day after the three-year anniversary of the killings of Ben and Catherine Mullany.
For the parents of the honeymoon couple the pain of coming face-to-face with their children's killers was immense and compounded by Martin and Howell's lack of remorse. But they took comfort in the support from their friends, family and colleagues. And they have ensured that the memory of Ben and Catherine lives on through the Mullany fund, launched shortly after their deaths to support UK students wishing to study medicine or physiotherapy but also to "help us to preserve their memories and ensure that their dreams live on".
A "gunshot-like sound" woke Brenda Reese as her Southwest Airlines flight cruised at 36,000ft (11,000m). Looking up, she could see the sky through a hole torn in the cabin roof.
The Boeing 737 lost cabin pressure after the hole appeared on Friday, prompting frightened passengers to grope for oxygen masks as the plane made a terrifying but controlled descent.
One passenger called it "pandemonium". Another watched as a flight attendant and another passenger passed out, apparently for lack of oxygen, their heads striking seats in front of them.
Officials said Flight 812 lost pressure because of a fuselage rupture. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) spokesman Ian Gregor said the pilot made a "controlled descent from 36,000ft to 11,000ft (3,350m) altitude".
His safe emergency landing at a military base in Yuma, about 240km south-west of Phoenix, drew applause from relieved passengers.
No serious injuries were reported among the 118 people aboard although a flight attendant was slightly hurt, according to Southwest officials. The cause of the hole was not immediately known. The FBI called it a "mechanical failure", not an act of terror or other foul play.
The plane is a 15-year-old Boeing 737-300. Southwest Airlines officials said they would pull about 80 similar planes out of service for inspections of the fuselage, forcing the airline to plan to cancel about 300 flights on Saturday.
Southwest officials said the Arizona plane had undergone all inspections required by the FAA, but they did not immediately provide the date of the last inspection.
The 737-300 is the oldest plane in Southwest's fleet, and the company is retiring 300s as it takes deliveries of new Boeing 737-700s and, beginning next year, 737-800s. But the process of replacing all the 300s could take years.
Reese said the plane had just left Phoenix Sky Harbor International airport for Sacramento, California, when the "gunshot-like sound" woke her up. She said oxygen masks dropped as the plane dove.
Seated one row from the rupture, Don Nelson said it took about four noisy minutes for the plane to dip to less than 10,000ft(3,000m). "You could tell there was an oxygen deficiency," he said.
Reese described the hole as "at the top of the plane, right up above where you store your luggage".
"The panel's not completely off," she told the Associated Press. "It's like ripped down, but you can see completely outside ... When you look up through the panel, you can see the sky."
Mobile phone photographs provided by Reese showed a panel hanging open in a section above the plane's middle aisle, with a hole about 6ft (1.8m) long.
The National Transportation Safety Board said an "in-flight fuselage rupture" led to the drop in cabin pressure aboard the plane.
A similar incident happened in July 2009 when a football-sized hole opened up in flight in the fuselage of another Southwest 737, depressurising the cabin. The plane made an emergency landing in Charleston, West Virginia. It was later determined that the hole was caused by metal fatigue.
Reese said passengers applauded the pilot after he emerged from the cockpit following the emergency landing in Yuma.
"I fly a lot. This is the first time I ever had something like this happen," said Reese, a 37-year-old single mother of three who is vice-president for a clinical research organisation. "I just want to get home and hold my kids."
Safural Blake took a long sip of her drink and decided it would definitely be her last. It was just after 4am on 2 January 2003 and the New Year's party she had been enjoying for the past few hours at the Uniseven hair salon in Aston, Birmingham, was beginning to turn sour.
It had started out as a small, private event organised by the salon owner, but details of the venue had been broadcast on a pirate radio station. Since then, a large group of young black males had begun congregating in the back room and as the night wore on they were becoming increasingly rowdy.
Safural tried to make her way to the exit, but found her route blocked. 'There was a surge of people coming towards me. I assumed there was a fight. I finally got outside and I saw three girls in fur coats lying on the floor. I thought they were playing around. Two were lying sideways and one was lying at the bottom of them. The first two were still, but the third girl was moving. And then she started screaming.'
Terrified, and desperate to get away, Safural ran off in search of her car, only to find the windows smashed and the seats covered in broken glass. The car was riddled with bullet holes. Behind her, back where the girls lay on the ground, she heard someone shout: 'They are dead, they are dead.'
Last month, four men were convicted of taking part in the drive-by shooting that claimed the lives of 18-year-old Charlene Ellis and her 17-year-old cousin Letisha Shakespeare. Charlene's twin sister, Sophie, and her other cousin Cheryl Shaw were also hit, but survived. Marcus Ellis, 24, Michael Gregory, 23, and Nathan Martin, 26, will each serve at least 35 years. Rodrigo Simms, 20, who played a lesser role in the attack, will not be eligible for parole until he has served at least 27 years.
The double murder brought the issue of gun crime and gang violence into sharp focus across the country. Until then, the majority of incidents had involved gang members killing one another. That four innocent girls could find themselves falling victim to the worst kind of random violence was a wake-up call no one could ignore.
The truth, however, is a little more complex. Although the girls were indeed innocents, they were not shot entirely by accident. That night, a fundamental shift had taken place in the Birmingham underworld - women had become legitimate targets in the on-going turf war between its two main rival gangs.
The inner-city Birmingham of the early Eighties was a tough place for a young black man to grow up. Racial tension exploded in vicious race riots in 1981 and again in 1985. The West Midlands police were regularly accused of over-zealous and heavy-handed behaviour, particularly when it came to the random stop-searching of black youths. There was also an ever-present threat from the far right.
It was in this climate that some of the city's young men began to band together for self-protection. Meeting up in a fast-food restaurant in the Lozells district, the loose-knit group planned to carry out vigilante patrols to protect the community and fight the injustices being overlooked.
One of the founders of this fledgling organisation was fork-lift truck driver Arthur 'Super D' Ellis. A good-looking man with the gift of the gab, he had fathered two sons - Nathaniel and Marcus - by the age of 19. His relationship with their mother had ended and by the time Arthur began hanging around with what had been dubbed the Johnson Crew he had moved on to pastures new. His relationship with a pretty girl named Beverley Thomas would also come to an end, but not before she had given him three more children - twins, Charlene and Sophie, and a son, Michael.
As the Johnson Crew grew, so the threat from the far right began to recede. And with unemployment in inner-city Birmingham running at 20 per cent, moving into crime became a way to make a living.
The gang members were very close-knit, often having lived on the same street for years and attended the same school. Over the years, as many members found themselves being excluded from school, they turned to petty street crime before progressing into fully fledged gangsters with a growing interest and influence in the city's burgeoning drugs market. By the late Eighties, the Johnson Crew controlled most of the city's drug supply and were prominent in nightclub security. They were making tens of thousands of pounds a week.
Disagreements over how to spend this money led to some members leaving to set up a rival firm. Basing themselves in a cafe, the Burger Bar Boys, as they became known, were bitter rivals to the Johnson Crew from day one. As crack cocaine swept through the city's poorest neighbourhoods, money poured into the gangs. The rivalry escalated, and so did the violence.
'It's a way of life now,' says one Burger Bar Boy who will only give his name as TC. 'Your gang is your family and people are willing to die for their families. It's not something you can just walk away from - you become a liability. If you're not in, then you're an outsider. Everyone I know has been to the funeral of someone they knew. I understand death in a way that even my parents don't.'
In 1994, Arthur 'Super D' Ellis was jailed for six years for manslaughter after stabbing a love rival to death. While he was inside, two of his sons became involved in the gangs. Marcus joined the Burger Bar Boys, quickly rising to a senior position, while Nathaniel, now a convicted armed robber, joined the Johnson Crew. Michael joined neither, but would soon become friends with several members of the Johnson Crew.
As the power of the gangs spread, so did their influence on the local community. When a leading figure in the Burger Boys was charged with the murder of Corey Wayne Allen, another leading Burger Boy who had fallen out with the gang, key witnesses retracted statements at the last minute for fear of reprisals. One was jailed for five days after appearing in the witness box but refusing to testify. The charges were dropped and the suspect walked free. Other members of the gang have pulled the same trick, walking free from court on charges of wounding with intent.
In 1997, police arrested several high-ranking members of the Johnson Crew after a DJ, Jason Wharton, was shot dead in his car in Handsworth. This time police took no chances. Witnesses gave evidence from behind bullet-proof screens and were allowed to wear disguises. The trial at Leicester Crown Court led to several convictions.
The police believed they had broken the back of the street gangs, but the case only raised the profile of both firms. Of the two, the Johnson Crew was slightly larger, partly because it had a number of female members, many of whom took an active part in a range of criminal activity.
By the end of the Nineties, the turf war between the Johnson Crew and the Burger Bar Boys had cost dozens of lives. West Midlands Police, the fourth largest in the country, had the second-highest number of armed call-outs in the UK. Staff at Birmingham's City Hospital became so adept at treating gunshot wounds that when several doctors were seconded for front-line medical duty during the Iraq war, they found they already possessed all the battlefield skills they needed.
Meanwhile, in Birmingham, the bloodshed continued. On 6 December 2002, brothers Nathan and Yohanne Martin hired a Mercedes SLK to help with their promotional business, Dynamite Entertainment, which booked music and comedy acts in the Birmingham area. Both brothers were long-standing members of the Burger Bar Boys.
No strangers to the world of violence, Yohanne, a father-of-one, had previously been accused of murdering 22-year-old Christopher Clarke, who was set upon by a gang of 20 men in March 2000, stabbed, punched and kicked to death. The murder charge, along with counts of wounding with intent and violent disorder, was dropped in April 2001, when the Crown Prosecution Service offered no evidence at Birmingham Crown Court. However, Martin was sent to prison after admitting possessing a pistol and ammunition. In the meantime, Nathan had amassed six convictions of his own, including an escape from custody and attempted robbery.
On the evening of 6 December, Yohanne took the hire car to see friends in West Bromwich. As he sat, parked by the side of the road, a car pulled up alongside. Two of the bullets hit Yohanne in the head, killing him instantly.
Nathan was devastated by the loss of his brother and determined to avenge his death. It was an open secret on the streets of Aston that a gang allied to the Johnson Crew had been responsible and it was only a matter of weeks before Nathan got the evidence he needed.
A few days before Christmas 2002, West Midlands Police arrested two women and charged them with Yohanne's murder. Charges against one would later be dropped, but the other, Chantella Falcon, was found to be instrumental in Yohanne's death. Just 18 years old, Chantella was a hard-core member of a gang called the Raiders, which was strongly aligned to the Johnson Crew.
'The shooting of Yohanne Martin changed everything,' says journalist Amardeep Bassey, whose soon-to-be-published book, Homeboys, chronicles the rise of Birmingham's street gangs. 'From that moment on women in gangs were seen as fair game. I don't think anyone deliberately went out looking for girls, but there was a sense that if they were in the way and got hurt, it wouldn't matter the way it might have done before.'
Nathan was determined to get revenge, and the New Year's Day party at Uniseven, which was due to be attended by several members of the Johnson Crew, seemed to provide the perfect opportunity. The plan was hatched over Christmas. Nathan recruited his best friend, Michael Gregory. His sister had been Yohanne's partner and was the mother of his child.
Nathan also called on Marcus Ellis, by then number two in command of the Burger Bar Boys. Ellis, the half-brother of Charlene Ellis and cousin of Letisha Shakespeare, would be in charge of collecting weapons for the hit. Ellis had four previous convictions, including one for violent disorder in connection with a murder that had taken place in 2001. Only Gregory had no convictions. He had applied for a Prince's Trust loan of ¡Ì5,000 to start a car-washing business.
Gregory bought a new mobile phone to co-ordinate the operation and Martin asked two friends who have never been identified to help him obtain a reliable car with which to carry out the hit.
On New Year's Eve 2002 two men, one Asian, one West Indian, travelled down to Northampton car dealer Anthony Hill to buy a red, high-performance P-registration Ford Mondeo. Interviewed by the police months later, Hill remembered the meeting for a number of reasons. First, the men told him they had come down from Birmingham, but seemed to have no car. In fact, their vehicle had been parked well out of sight. Unusually, they declined the offer of a test drive and instead handed over the agreed price of ¡Ì1,850.
The dealer also remembered that their phones kept ringing throughout the short meeting. 'You're a busy chap,' Hill said to one. 'What do you do for a living?' There was no reply. The buyers were in a hurry and in no mood for small talk. It was only when they handed over the cash that they realised they did not have enough money left for petrol. After a little negotiation, Mr Hill handed back ¡Ì10. The men climbed into the Mondeo and sped away.
CCTV cameras would later pick up the Mondeo making its way from Northampton to Birmingham along the M1, followed closely by a silver Vauxhall Vectra. Analysis of the number plate soon identified the second car's owner: Nathan Martin.
Charlene Ellis, her twin sister Sophie, their cousin Cheryl Shaw and friend Letisha Shakespeare were virtually inseparable. The four college friends, all churchgoers, shared a love of R&B and fashion.
A few weeks earlier, Charlene, Sophie and Cheryl had performed at a talent show. Under the name the Bombshell Ladies, they sang their own brand of gritty urban rap. Although Letisha wasn't part of the group she was a big fan, and attended all their gigs. The year before, they had performed on the Midlands pirate radio station Serious FM and had hopes that one day they might cut a CD.
Although none of the girls had criminal records or was involved in violence, their lyrics reflected the reality of the inner-city life they saw around them. 'If you want to fight me look at the door,' ran the lyrics to one track. 'Left your daughter lying on the floor with a broken jaw, you can't get with mini mini me, bash you out the window, kick you in the crutches then butt you in the face.'
On the night of the party at Uniseven, the four girls had been dropped off at Rosie O'Brien's nightclub in Solihull by Cheryl's mother, Sandra Thomas, and her mother's boyfriend, Paul Nixon. It was he who got them to line up and pose for the now infamous picture next to a Christmas tree. They were, he noted, 'happy, laughing and joking, and looking forward to the night out'.
The party had turned Rosie O'Brien's into something of a Johnson Crew stronghold that night. During the evening, one alleged supporter of the gang, Jermaine Carty, aka MC Wooly, took to the stage and started rapping, 'bigging up' the Johnson Crew. In the early hours of the morning the party moved on to the Uniseven Salon.
According to Cheryl Shaw, there was something odd about the party from the moment she and her friends arrived. 'The atmosphere was not like I thought it would be. There were a lot of old men there. It was quite strange.'
The four friends spent most of their time inside, but as the numbers at the party rose from 50 to more than 100, the rooms became unbearably hot and they moved outside for a breath of fresh air.
In the meantime, the fourth member of the Burger Bar Boy hit team, Rodrigo Simms, was hard at work. He had gone along to the party at Uniseven to act as 'spotter' and had been receiving regular phone calls from Gregory and the others in the Mondeo, asking whether any members of the Johnson Crew were there. Although he was associated with the Burgers and the salon was within Johnson territory, Simms was safe, as the salon was owned by a member of his family. Each time Gregory called, Simms confirmed that members of the Johnson Crew, including Jermaine Carty, were present. The hit could go ahead.
In the Mondeo, Marcus Ellis, sitting in the front passenger seat, finished cleaning the Mac 10 machine gun that was the pride of the Burger Bar Boy arsenal. He handed the weapon over his shoulder to Nathan Martin and loaded a 9mm pistol for his own use. Sitting beside him in the driver's seat, Michael Gregory eased the car into gear and moved off. It was payback time.
The four girls had gone back inside the salon, but once again it became too hot for them and they moved back outside. They had been there only a few minutes when Cheryl noticed a red Ford Mondeo travelling slowly towards them.
'I saw a gun outside the passenger-side window and someone with a balaclava on. The gun was black and square shaped at the front.'
While Ellis focused his attention on shooting at a Johnson Crew man, Martin, mad with rage over the death of his brother, targeted the small group in front of him. The fact that the group was mainly women made no difference. The party had been invaded by members of the Johnson Crew and the crew had plenty of female members. Women from the crew had also been linked to his brother's death. As far as he was concerned, anyone at the party was a legitimate target.
Martin steadied his aim and squeezed the trigger of the Mac 10. Capable of firing 1,200 rounds per minute, the Mac 10 is notoriously difficult to control, even for trained marksmen. In gangland circles it is often referred to as the 'spray and pray'.
Within a split second, 23 empty cartridge cases had fallen from the side of the weapon. Charlene was the first to die. A bullet smashed into her left arm and the second hit her shoulder. The third hit her face and lodged in her brain, fracturing her skull and causing a massive haemorrhage. Letisha was shot four times. The fatal bullet pierced her heart and lungs and came out of her back. She was also shot in the right arm, left arm and pelvis. All four bullets travelled straight through her body.
Sophie was hit in the chest and arm, causing serious injuries, while Cheryl was hit in the hand. 'It happened quickly,' she later told the police.
'I saw the gun then I heard gunshots. I just stared at the gun in shock. I raised my hands to my face. I fell to the ground. I had a pain in my hand. I got up and started running to my right.'
In all, 37 cartridge cases were found at the scene, fired from three weapons - the Mac 10 machine gun, a Spanish Llama pistol and another weapon which has never been identified.
A few minutes later Michael Ellis, brother to twins Sophie and Charlene, was woken by a telephone call from Jermaine Carty. 'Your sisters are on the ground. It was the Burgers.' Michael raced to the scene, then followed his surviving sister to hospital, where she was rushed into theatre for life-saving surgery. As the doctors began to operate, Michael Ellis picked up a phone and called the only member of the Burger Bar Boys he knew - his half- brother, Marcus.
'Your lot shot my sister,' said Michael.
'What do you mean?' answered Marcus.
Michael fired a stream of questions at his half-brother, but the line was already dead.
Michael called Marcus again later that morning to report that Charlene was dead. Marcus said nothing; he simply hung up. He went on the run immediately afterwards and would remain out of touch with family and friends for weeks.
The inquiry into the New Year's Day party shootings was one of the biggest West Midlands Police had ever launched. Officers collected 1,300 statements, recovered 40 vehicles for forensic analysis and spent tens of thousands of man-hours trying to put together a case. 'What shocked us most,' said one officer close to the inquiry, 'is that if you drew a line linking the names of the people murdered and those involved in the case, you would end up with something resembling a family tree.'
It didn't take long before the investigating officers ran into the familiar wall of silence. Although many of those at the salon had clearly seen what had happened, almost all refused to comment.
Desperate to secure convictions, the police and the Crown Prosecution Service realised they could only persuade people to come forward by providing them with a level of protection never seen before in an English courtroom, including voice distortion, screens to prevent witnesses being seen and the widespread use of pseudonyms.
One of these witnesses - 'Mark Brown' - was to play a key part in the trial. He was the only one to come forward and say he saw the killers at the scene of the crime. Brown claimed to have seen Nathan Martin and Marcus Ellis in a red Ford moments before the shootings. He claimed he saw Ellis cleaning a gun and that he then ran back to the party. But he did not see the shooting, as he had his back to the car. Rodrigo Simms was talking on a mobile phone in an alleyway, he added.
The defence tried to make much of his past: 'Brown' admitted under cross-examination that he had convictions for robbery, affray and assaulting a police officer. It later emerged that he had been paid 'thousands' by the police to help protect him after he agreed to testify. Despite these concerns - some of which may be used as grounds for a forthcoming appeal - the four men were convicted.
Despite the convictions, West Midlands Police say the case is far from over. They believe many others were involved in the plot to attack the Johnson Crew that night and they plan a number of arrests and conspiracy charges in the coming weeks. These arrests are expected to lead to a number of high-profile murder trials.
Although gun crime in Birmingham has fallen slightly in recent months, no one is optimistic that this is anything other than temporary. 'Although members of these gangs are invariably linked with armed criminality, the problem is not just one of law and order,' says Amardeep Bassey. 'Gang culture is a social phenomenon that is reaching near-epidemic levels on the streets of inner-city Birmingham. It is only now that the gangs are finally being recognised, and classed as urban terrorists who pose a real and serious threat to the safety of our cities.'
We spend a lot of time talking about which cities see the most gun violence. But analyzing gun violence at the city level is very misleading. Gun violence is much more local than that.
The Guardian is releasing a new set of nationwide data for 2015 that maps gun murders at the micro level ? down to the local census tract. You can use this data to do analysis of how gun murder clusters within neighborhoods in your city or state.
Our analysis was possible thanks to the not-for-profit Gun Violence Archive (GVA), which tracks shootings and gun deaths using media reports. This data set includes the latitude and longitude of each shooting incident. We mapped each of these geolocated gun murders to a census tract ? which means that there¡¯s a wealth of demographic data connected to each census tract, allowing you to analyze the levels of poverty, educational attainment and other factors in neighborhoods where gun murders happen.
This article contains the data we used to conduct this analysis. We invite you to download this data and use it for further analysis and reporting. If you use this data, please make sure to credit the Gun Violence Archive and the Guardian.Using this data, the Guardian found that half of the United States¡¯ gun murders in 2015 were clustered in 127 cities (Want to fix gun violence? Go local). We also found that violence was concentrated even further than simply the city level: census tract areas that contain just 1.5% of the country¡¯s population saw 26% of America¡¯s total gun homicides.
We appended a few other fields to the existing GVA data. Using the FCC¡¯s Census Block Conversion API, we placed each incident within its proper census tract. With the census tract identified, we used the Five-Year American Community Survey 2014-2010 to find demographic information for the tracts. We also determined the land area of each tract with the US Census: Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles ? Census Tracts.
We¡¯ve also included a separate easy-to-use file of FBI murder data from 1985 to 2015.
If you have questions about the data, please email gundata@theguardian.com. If you use this data to do your own analysis ? whether you¡¯re a journalist or a community organization ? please let us know, and send a link to your final project to gundata@theguardian.com, or contact our reporters directly: lois.beckett@theguardian.com and jamiles.lartey@theguardian.com.
Each file is a .csv, which can be opened in Excel and Google Sheets, in addition to the text editor of your choice.
All GVA data is from 2015, but you can obtain data from 2014 to the present by going to their website or following them on twitter @gundeaths for daily updates.
City-level data ? each row includes a city or county (depending on how it was reported by the GVA), as well as counts for incidents and people killed.
Tract-level data ? each row includes a census tract, as well as counts for incidents and people killed.
Previous stories have made use of UCR data, which we obtained from the FBI.
City-level murder data from 1985-2015 ? each row is a city, and includes the murder rate and raw number of murders for each year from 1985-2015. Some years are missing for cities. National data on city murder statistics from 2016 will not be available from the FBI until the fall of 2017.
Download a description of all of the above data files with notes here.
Blake, aged 53, had returned from dinner with his crew in Macapa, a remote city on the northern bank of the Amazon delta, when a gang of up to eight men arrived at his boat by rubber dinghy.
When the gang, wearing motorcycle helmets, made their demands, Blake reached for his gun and shot one of them, according to Brazilian police. In retaliation the robbers opened fire. Blake died from gunshot wounds. Two other members of the crew were injured.
It was a tragic end for the man who dominated the world of sailing for more than a decade, twice securing the America's Cup - the sport's most prestigious trophy - for his native New Zealand. Blake was also the only man to complete five Whitbread Round the World races, finally winning in 1990 when, uniquely, he finished first in all six legs.
"He was a New Zealand hero and everyone will feel a great sense of sadness at his death," Paul East, New Zealand's high commissioner in London, said.
Last night, as tributes continued to pour in from around the world for the man whose other great love was the environment, the New Zealand ambassador in Brazil arrived in Macapa. Brazilian police said the robbers took a watch and the boat's motor. No one has been arrested.
Blake, who was appointed in July as a goodwill ambassador of the United Nation's environment programme, was on a research expedition - sponsored by Omega - that was progressing up the River Amazon. He arrived in Rio de Janeiro on September 12 and headed north up the Brazilian coast. He reached Belem, where the Amazon meets the Atlantic Ocean, on October 2. The crew was planning to sail upstream and reach Venzeuela at the beginning of February.
Blake was travelling with 14 crew, including his daughter Sarah Jane. Nine people were on board the Seamaster yacht when the attack happened, just after 10pm on Wednesday.
The riverside near Macapa is well known for its violence, said a man in the city who did not want to be named. "Blake was badly advised to anchor there," he said. "The police definitely know who did it, but they will only catch them if there is enough international pressure."
Blake arrived in Macapa away from the eyes of the local media. "There is no way the pirates knew who he was. For them he was just another tourist with a large boat."
While on his Amazonian journey Blake kept a log on his website. The last entry was written on Wednesday, the day he died. "Status: still motoring. Conditions: pleasant," he wrote. "Dusk has turned the surface of the river into a greasy grey, with the sky quickly darkening after the sun's orange and golds have gone.
"Again, I raise the question: why are we here? Our aim is to begin to understand the reasons why we must all start appreciating what we have before it is too late. We want to restart people caring for the environment as it must be cared for. We want to make a difference."
Blake, who had started to sail aged five, had achieved what he set out to do in the sport- everything. His domination was a hallmark of his application, persistence and overriding passion for the job in hand. The yacht in which he finally won the Whitbread, Steinlager 2, was built to the limits of the rule for that race. It incorporated his and designer Bruce Farr's thinking and gave him a psychological as well as physical advantage over his rivals.
In those days (1989/90), the race was scored on cumulative time and at the end of the first leg, from Southampton to Punta del Este in Uruguay, Blake had such a commanding lead that he need only sail the rest of the race conservatively to be sure of overall victory.
Buoyed by that success, Blake was sought by Sir Michael Fay to instil a spirit of teamwork into his America's Cup campaign for New Zealand in 1992.
He was devastated by the failure of this campaign, and when Fay stood down Blake picked up the gauntlet, mortgaging his house to pay the $75,000 deposit for a challenge in 1995. At the time he had no support, but he had always had strong backers in his home country and financial leaders provided most of the money needed.
He had, by then, captured the Jules Verne Trophy for the fastest sailing circumnavigation with co-skipper Robin Knox-Johnston aboard the 92-foot catamaran Enza. His "lucky red socks" - knitted for him by his wife Pippa - became an icon. 500,000 pairs were sold in New Zealand, with half a million dollars helping the challenge fund.
Black Magic, with Blake as skipper, lost only two races in the challenger trials and went on to win the cup in straight races. He received a knighthood, and managed the successful defence of the Cup in 2000, again winning in five straight races.
He had earlier become head of the Jacques Cousteau Foundation. Blake took the foundation's specially designed boat and set off on scientific exploration in Antarctic waters twice before opting for further scientific research up the Amazon.
A police officer and three Napoli supporters were injured, one fan critically, in clashes before Saturday's Copa Italia final between Napoli and Fiorentina in Rome, Italian television and news agencies reported. The ANSA news agency reports that the shootings occurred in Rome's periphery where Napoli fans were gathering for the match.
One man was shot in the chest as he walked towards Stadio Olimpico and taken to Villa San Pietro hospital, it was reported. It said another supporter was shot in the arm, while the police officer was shot in the hand. Circumstances of the shootings were not immediately clear however the pistol used in the incidents has been found by the police, the AGI news agency said.
Clashes were also reported in the Tor di Quinto area close to the stadium, with rival supporters throwing firecrackers and other objects at each other ahead of the game, forcing a delay to the 7pm GMT kick-off. The website of daily newspaper La Repubblica reported a total of six people injured in the clashes. The police were only immediately able to confirm the injury to the supporter shot in the chest.
She lived as the "godmother of cocaine", ruthlessly ordering scores of bloody murders and violent revenge attacks as she plotted the course of Miami's infamous drug wars.
So it seemed only fitting that the manner of Griselda Blanco's death on Monday reflected the brutality for which she became notorious ? gunned down in the street by a killer on a motorcycle as she left a butcher's shop in her hometown of Medellin, Colombia.
Blanco, 69, was credited with inventing the motorcycle ride-by killing during her years controlling southern Florida's fledgling cocaine trade in the late 70s and early 80s, an era in which she pocketed billions of dollars before being convicted of three murders, including that of a two-year-old boy. Detectives suspected her of dozens more.
"It's some kind of poetic justice that she met an end that she delivered to so many others," said Professor Bruce Bagley, head of the University of Miami's department of international studies and author of the book Drug Trafficking in the Americas.
"Here is a woman who made a lot of enemies on her rise and was responsible for the deaths of untold numbers of?people.
"She might have retired to Colombia and wasn't anything like the kind of player she was in her early days, but she had lingering enemies almost everywhere you look. What goes around comes around."
Blanco, who was deported from the US in 2004 after serving almost two decades in jail in New York and Florida for racketeering and murder, became one of Miami's original drugs gangsters as tidal waves of smuggled cocaine swept aside marijuana as the dealers' most profitable commodity.
She set up a distribution network across the US that netted her tens of millions of dollars a month, making shipments of more than 1,500kg, and maintained her dominance by building an empire staffed with violent enforcers, who were well rewarded for following her orders to execute rivals at the drop of a hat to and make sure they left, no witnesses.
She was also personally involved in developing creative methods to get cocaine into the US, even setting up a lingerie shop in Colombia that produced underwear for export with secret compartments.
Her story, which was featured in the 2008 documentary Cocaine Cowboys: Hustlin' with the Godmother, showed that her love of the underworld did not only extend to her drugs activities. A son with her third husband, Dario Sepulveda, was christened Michael Corleone Blanco after the central figure in the Godfather trilogy of mafia movies.
Two of her three other sons by her first husband were murdered after entering the family business.
Blanco became a widow three times, and remained under suspicion for the deaths of all three husbands. In one notorious episode in 1975, remarkable even among Colombia's hardened drugs criminals for its violence, she confronted her husband and business partner Alberto Bravo in a Bogota nightclub car park over millions of dollars missing from the profits of the cartel they built together.
Blanco, then 32, pulled out a pistol, Bravo responded by producing an Uzi submachine gun and after a blazing gun battle he and six bodyguards lay dead. Blanco, who suffered only a minor gunshot wound to the stomach, recovered and soon afterwards moved to Miami, where her body count ? and reputation for ruthlessness ? continued to climb.
During her Florida reign of terror she was suspected of responsibility in at least 40 murders, possibly as many as 200, yet was convicted of only three ? two drug dealers who crossed her and a two-year-old boy, Johnny Castro, the son of a former Blanco enforcer, who was shot twice in the head by hitmen as he travelled in his father's car.
Blanco's former lieutenant, Jorge Ayala, told police: "At first she was real mad because we missed the father, but when she heard we had gotten the son by accident, she said she was glad, that they were even."
She escaped the death penalty on a technicality when Ayala was discredited as a witness after being caught having phone sex with secretaries in the prosecutors' office.
Bagley said Blanco, who was shot twice in the head, was likely to become the subject of books or a Hollywood movie.
"She was a pioneer in the sense that she helped to forge and carve out the drugs trade in south Florida and used bloody tactics to do so," he said.
"The danger is she will be remembered not for her cold-heartedness and brutality but for being a woman entrepreneur in an emerging field dominated by men."
Lucy Hargreaves, 22, was dragged from the family home in Walton, Liverpool, as fire swept through the ground floor. Merseyside police yesterday revealed she had been shot twice - in the head and chest - before the blaze started. It is thought she was already dead by the time the fire took hold at the terrace house early on Wednesday.
Police are searching for three men who had their faces concealed and were dressed in dark clothing. They were seen acting suspiciously in the area shortly before the fire broke out.
Detective Chief Inspector Ian Mulcahey, who is leading the murder investigation, said the fire could easily have killed Ms Hargreaves' partner and her two-year-old daughter. The couple's two other children, aged five and three, were on holiday with their grandparents in the south of England.
Mr Mulcahey said: "It defies belief why anyone would do something like this. There is nothing to show why people would pick on this lady and we are trying to establish a motive.
"This was a targeted attack at the premises, but there is no evidence that this is linked to any other incident in Merseyside. It is not drugs or gangland related.
"Three young children have lost their mother, and her partner has been left traumatised."
The three suspected gunmen got into the house at around 12.30am on Wednesday. Police said Ms Hargreaves was downstairs in the living room, because she had been having trouble sleeping. Her 28-year-old partner was woken by the incident and went to the top of the stairs to see the fire on the ground floor. Both he and his daughter escaped by jumping from a rear window. They were treated in hospital for minor injuries.
Neighbour Rachel Verdy, 22, said: "I looked out of the window and the house was blazing. The dad and daughter were outside and covered in black soot. Then another neighbour ran into the house and tried to rescue the girl. He managed to get her out but the ambulances couldn't help her.
A Lexus RX300 estate car was discovered burnt out 250 yards away. Detectives want to speak to anyone who saw it in the hours before the murder.
A spokeswoman for Merseyside police said: "We believe the attackers made their way into the house, shooting the woman in the living room. They then used petrol to set the house alight."
On Sunday 28 April 1996 a security guard, Ian Kingston, stood in the doorway of the Broad Arrow cafe at the historic site of Port Arthur in southern Tasmania. He stared at the body of a man lying on the floor, then looked up into the barrel of a semi-automatic rifle. He dived back out the door as Martin Bryant pulled the trigger. Bryant killed 12 people in 15 seconds.
On the gravel path outside the cafe Kingston tried to herd people who thought the gunshots were part of a historical re-enactment up the garden and out of range. He knew he couldn¡¯t go back inside. ¡°You don¡¯t get a second chance with a gun like that,¡± Kingston says.
Bryant moved towards the gift shop in the next 75 seconds, killing another eight people. In little over half an hour the death toll would be 35, with 23 wounded. It became the worst single-person mass shooting in Australia¡¯s history; and is still the third worst recorded worldwide.
The gun was an AR-15 rifle with a 30-shot magazine. Bryant exchanged it for a semi-automatic .308 FN rifle he had stowed in the boot of his car. Both were then legal in Tasmania, which, with Queensland, had the loosest gun regulation in Australia and felt the tightest grip of the gun lobby.
In 1987 a frustrated Barry Unsworth, then premier of New South Wales, stormed out of a national gun summit in which Tasmania had resisted changes proposed after two mass shootings in Melbourne that year, declaring: ¡°It will take a massacre in Tasmania before we get gun reform in Australia.¡±
He was right.
Twelve days after the Port Arthur massacre, the Australian prime minister, John Howard, announced a sweeping package of gun reforms in a country where firearms had long been considered an essential prop in the national mythology of life in the bush.
¡°At that stage the gun lobby was the ruling lobby in Australia,¡± says Philip Alpers, associate professor at the University of Sydney. ¡°What happened at Port Arthur is that they were outpaced, outflanked and outwitted by a man who had the power to move in 12 remarkable days.¡±
Tim Fischer was leader of the National party and Howard¡¯s deputy prime minister in the Coalition government, charged with persuading sceptical country voters to support, or at least accept, reforms. ¡°Port Arthur was our Sandy Hook,¡± he says. ¡°Port Arthur we acted on. The USA is not prepared to act on their tragedies.¡±
Next month survivors and family members of the victims will gather on the lawn outside the Port Arthur site to mark the 20th anniversary of the massacre and the 20th anniversary of the gun reforms, which some worry are being chipped away as memory of the tragedy fades. Some restrictions have been relaxed and in many states, New South Wales in particular, shooters¡¯ organisations are getting their voice heard by government. Commentators have warned against Australia getting too proud of itself on gun control. Nonetheless, there have been no mass shootings in the 20 years since Port Arthur; in the 20 years before it there were 13. The number of deaths by gunshot wound, which was already declining at a rate of 3% a year before the reforms, declined at a rate of 6% a year post-1996, according to a study co-written by Alpers and Simon Chapman.
Howard made gun control the focus of a nation in mourning. In his condolence motion to parliament on 30 April 1996, the first sitting day of his government, he said the tragedy forced the country to reflect upon ¡°the vexed issue of gun control laws¡±. It was just six weeks after the Dunblane massacre in Scotland, killings which led to a ban on handguns and tighter gun control in the UK.
¡°I will do all that I humanly can as leader of the government to bring about a significant improvement and to address some of the great deficiencies that exist,¡± Howard said.
He later described gun control as ¡°one of the things of which I am most proud¡±. Even critics of the conservative leader cite it as one of the best examples of Australian political leadership in recent history.
Six weeks before the Port Arthur massacre, Tony Rundle was sworn in as the Liberal premier of Tasmania. Tasmanian politics, never the calmest of waters, was more than usually full of sharks at the scent of a vulnerable minority government. On the afternoon of 28 April, Rundle and his new police minister, John Beswick, were at distant points on the state¡¯s north coast when they took calls saying there was a gunman on the loose. Within hours both were at police headquarters in Hobart listening as the death toll climbed.
Beswick had already been briefed by the police department about a push for national firearm laws that had been scuppered by Tasmania and Queensland at a meeting of police ministers the previous year, and had a few days earlier instructed his department to begin drafting a cabinet submission to ban high-powered military-style weapons in response to a proposal from the gun control lobby.
¡°It¡¯s the last place in the world that you would imagine something happening,¡± Beswick tells the Guardian. ¡°It wasn¡¯t a politically motivated thing, it wasn¡¯t a terrorist. This was just a psychopath killing people with guns.
¡°I immediately began to think that this was going to mean that something was going to have to be done about tightening up the legislation, not just in Tasmania, but the uniform legislation that had been talked about nationally.¡±
A gun control advocate, Roland Browne, was hosting a meeting at his Hobart house to prepare for the sit-down with Beswick. It was the furthest they had got with any police minister in years.
¡°At that point in time, Tasmania¡¯s laws were the weakest, the poorest in the country,¡± Browne says. ¡°We had a licensing system but it was a licensing system that really had no teeth ¡¦ Although the perpetrator of the Port Arthur massacre didn¡¯t have a gun licence, if he had of applied for one, he would unquestionably have got one.¡±
At Melbourne airport, the state Labor leader, Michael Field, saw a breaking news banner flash across the football broadcast while he was waiting for a connecting flight to Canberra to talk strategy with the national Labor leader, Kim Beazley. He immediately booked a return flight home.
¡°The death toll just went up when I was waiting for the plane ¡¦ The tragedy just got bigger and bigger,¡± Field says.
Bryant, then 28, had chosen the heritage site, a former convict prison and asylum, for its brutal past, reportedly saying in his pre-sentence psychiatric assessment: ¡°A lot of violence has happened there. It must be the most violent place in Australia. It seemed the right place.¡±
He killed 31 people there before driving in a stolen BMW back to a bed and breakfast called Seascape, where he had earlier killed the owners, David and Noelene Martin. At a service station on the way he killed Zoe Hall and took her boyfriend, Glenn Pears, hostage, forcing him into the boot of the BMW. The entire attack, from the time he fired his first shot at Port Arthur to the time he returned to Seascape, took 22 minutes. He would remain at Seascape in a standoff with police for more than 18 hours.
At 2pm at Port Arthur, Kingston gathered a group of 60 people in the parsonage and used the landline to alert other buildings on the site, telling them to keep people inside. There was no one to tell them where Bryant had gone. He called police and the state emergency services and, after a few minutes, went back to the cafe to see if he could do anything to help. ¡°It was like a slaughterhouse,¡± he says. ¡°There was people and blood everywhere and people crying. Oh, it was shocking. Terrible.¡±
The carnage was such that everyone who had anything to do with the attack ? all 490 police officers, scores of medical and ambulance personnel, Port Arthur staff, politicians, journalists and members of the public, visitors and staff alike ? required counselling.
It was a scene that would later haunt Kingston. ¡°Should I have waited until he came out? Should I have tried to tackle him? ¡¦ It¡¯s the kind of thing that you dwell on for years,¡± he says.
¡°Did I do the right thing? Would I have saved more lives if I tried to tackle him rather than get people away from the front of the cafe?¡±
While Kingston was corralling survivors, a police constable, Pat Allen, was in a leech-filled ditch 2.5km away, watching bullets fired by Bryant bounce off the gravel road in front of Seascape and crack into the bush behind. Allen had dived into the ditch alongside a local Dunalley police officer, Gary Whittle ? one of the first police on the scene ? at 2.24pm, after reversing up to the driveway of Seascape to lessen his chances of being shot. The driveway was on a bend of the Arthur Highway about a kilometre from the Fox and Hound, a Tudor-style hotel which had been claimed as a sanctuary by people wounded when Bryant shot at their cars.
Allen and Whittle stayed in the ditch for eight hours, until police from the special operations group smuggled them out.
¡°It was very simple: I knew where he was, he was shooting at us,¡± Allen says. ¡°So I had no concerns about where he was.
¡°We held the position for eight hours where we were and it didn¡¯t seem like eight hours. It went really quickly. And the sound of choppers going back and forth and the shots going off, it was very surreal, very surreal the whole thing.¡±
At the time, Allen says, police didn¡¯t know if anyone but Bryant was alive in the home. They later found out it was unlikely the final hostage, the only one alive when the siege started, was alive for long. ¡°I certainly carried this around for a long time, will carry it around for the rest of my life: I was down there, but what good was I?¡± Allen says.
¡°What good were we, what did we do? I know we did the best that we could with the resources we had, but at the end of the day all these people had already died and this thing [Bryant] is in the house and I had nothing but contempt and anger for him.
¡°I wish he had tried to break out ¡¦ Not that police should ever be executioners, but if he was firing on us then we would have been forced to fire back and he might have just seen what it was like to be fired back at.¡±
Bryant, who was later sentenced to 35 counts of life imprisonment by a judge who branded him a ¡°pathetic social misfit¡±, didn¡¯t try to leave the house until 7.48am the next day.
¡°He set the place on fire and consequently set himself on fire as well,¡± says a former special operations group commander, Hank Timmerman. ¡°His clothes as well were burning and he came running out on fire ¡¦ so we had to extinguish him as well as arrest him.¡±
While Bryant was being taken to Royal Hobart hospital for burn treatment, Beswick met Rundle in his office. The federal attorney general, Daryl Williams, had already told the media the gun laws would change after the massacre but the next scheduled meeting of police ministers was not until July. Beswick said that wasn¡¯t soon enough; he called Williams and the meeting was set for 10 May.
¡°My position was that action needed to be taken and it needed to be taken promptly to at least make sure that something positive took place out of this terrible event,¡± Beswick says. ¡°By the time we got to the special meeting of police ministers, John Howard had announced what we were going to do.¡±
Howard was in Sydney when the massacre started. That night he returned to Canberra. ¡°I remember having a meeting with people on my staff. I came to the Lodge [the prime minister¡¯s residence] and we sat and talked about it for a couple of hours. We discussed immediately the possibility of changing the law,¡± he told the ABC last month.
¡°I decided this was big enough and important enough to use the authority I clearly had. At that time I¡¯d only been prime minister for six weeks, I had a majority of 45 in a house of 150, we¡¯d really annihilated the Labor party in the last election and the new leader, Kim Beazley, was a very reasonable man. I knew the Labor party would probably support any new measures we brought in and I thought, ¡®For heavens sake, what¡¯s the point of being in office when you can¡¯t do something significant in relation to something that affects community safety?¡¯ ¡±
Before Port Arthur most states had a weak licensing system and no requirement to register guns. Howard proposed each state and territory should introduce and enforce a firearm licensing and registration system requiring people to have a ¡°genuine reason¡± for having a firearm, such as sport or target shooting, recreational hunting or being a farmer. ¡°Personal protection¡± would not count as a genuine reason. All states would also ban automatic and semi-automatic long guns.
Howard also introduced a national gun buyback scheme for all weapons that did not comply, which ended up melting down more than 650,000 firearms at a cost of $350m.
He produced polling at the meeting that showed the ideas behind the reforms had up to 90% support. If the states did not fall into line, he and Williams warned, they would hold a referendum and seize power for firearm registration from the states. They fell into line, even Queensland, where some members of the conservative state government resisted ? despite the public support of the premier, Rob Borbidge.
Research by a Wilfrid Laurier University academic and former economist with the Australian treasury, Christine Neill, and then Australian National University academic and now federal Labor MP, Andrew Leigh, published in the American Law and Economics Review in 2010, found the buyback cut the rate of firearm suicides by 74% in the first 10 years, saving 200 lives a year.
Alpers, who runs the website GunPolicy.org, says the success of the laws was due as much to ¡°a sea change in public attitudes about gun violence¡± as it was to the restrictions.
He says a discernible portion of the guns in Australia in 1996 were neither registered nor destroyed, and there were widespread claims that people would bury their guns rather than give them up. But as there was no count on the number of guns in Australia before gun registration came in, the number unaccounted for is not known. (There are now more than 3.2m registered firearms in Australia, just shy of one for every eight people.)
¡°I recall things like a rush on a certain diameter of poly piping, that fit nicely into a post hole ? though that could be apocryphal,¡± he says.
Fischer¡¯s task of selling the reforms was not straightforward. In Queensland particularly, where the gun lobby had considerable sway in rural electorates, opposition quickly reasserted after the massacre. ¡°I was hanged in effigy at Gympie [a Queensland town] during the course of a shooting club rally,¡± Fischer tells the Guardian. ¡°It was a big cultural change for Australia.¡±
While his deputy prime minister was symbolically lynched, Howard provoked a deeper anger among gun owners by wearing a bulletproof vest under his jacket to address a heated meeting in Sale, Victoria. Howard¡¯s staff had been told of a death threat but the leader later acknowledged this was a mistake.
Fischer says he was repeatedly told the gun reforms would cost him his seat and cost the Howard government, the first conservative government in 13 years, the general election. They did neither. Fischer has since become a vocal advocate for gun control and frequent critic of the US for its failure to address the issue.
In Tasmania there was tripartisan support. Rundle stood shoulder-to-shoulder with Field and the then Tasmanian Greens leader, Christine Milne, at every press conference about Port Arthur and gun control, and the three parties ushered the reforms unanimously through parliament in August.
¡°No one really attempted to make any political gains out of this even though there was a lot of pressure on individual members of parliament, particularly those in rural areas,¡± Rundle says. ¡°In some areas there was quite a lot of resistance, which is understandable. A lot of gun owners are decent, law-abiding people.¡±
Beswick says it took the ¡°shock¡± of the Port Arthur massacre to create the necessary political will. The tragedy, he says, had to be politicised to make change.
¡°This was something that needed to be done and this was the time to do it, and if we hadn¡¯t done it then we would have failed our duty,¡± he says.
Allen, now president of the Police Association of Tasmania, says gun control must not be allowed to slip as Port Arthur began to slide from people¡¯s memory.
Since the 1996 national firearms agreement, four states have moved to wind back the mandatory 28 days ¡°cooling-off¡± period between applying for and buying a gun, a trend Howard last year described as disturbing. One of those states was Tasmania, where the cooling-off period for buying a second or third gun was halved after being described by the police minister, Rene Hidding ? who was a member of Rundle¡¯s government ? ¡°as unnecessary and frustrating red tape¡±.
Last year Carolyn Loughton, who survived the Broad Arrow cafe but whose daughter, Sarah, did not, launched a public campaign against the importation of Adler A110 rapid-fire shot guns to Australia.
¡°Because of my experience I would be horrified and negligent if I didn¡¯t speak up and witnessed other people in Australia going through this horror,¡± she told the ABC. ¡°So I have to. I¡¯m obliged to speak up.¡±
The cafe has been turned into a ruin, tucked behind a hedge, forming a sombre memorial garden unnoticed by many visitors to the tourist site. A hardwood cross stands before the cliff face, where it was placed by locals a few days after the murders. It bears a long brass plaque listing 35 names. Every year on 28 April a small group lays a wreath before it and stands in silence at 1.35pm.
¡°We can¡¯t let these weapons be let back into the country because some would-be bloody army person ¡¦ decides that, ¡®I need an automatic shotgun because I want to go and kill five ducks at once instead of one duck,¡¯ ¡± Allen says. ¡°How many ducks can you eat?
¡°Government can¡¯t be tricked so we end up with another Port Arthur, we end up with another lunatic wandering around just killing all those people.¡±
A military court in the Democratic Republic of Congo sentenced two Norwegians to death today after convicting them of espionage and murder.
Norway said it would seek to block the executions of Joshua French, 27, and Tjostolv Moland, 28, who were arrested after their driver was found dead with a gunshot wound to his head in May. Both men denied charges of murder, attempted murder, espionage, conspiracy and armed robbery
"The court declares that all crimes are established in fact and in law ... and sentences Tjostolv Moland to the death penalty ... and Joshua French to the death penalty," an unnamed officer told a packed courthouse in the city of Kisangani.
The court also ruled that Norway and the two men will have to pay the Congolese state $60m (¡Ì36m), on top of tens of thousands of dollars in compensation to members of the driver's family. The ruling was met with cheers in the courthouse, according to Reuters.
Before the sentence, Norway strongly expressed concerns that the men would not receive a fair trial. "It is very serious that two Norwegians have been given a death sentence. Norway will use all means and channels available to prevent these Norwegians being killed," Jonas Gahr Stoere, Norway's foreign minister, told reporters today.
Captain Claude Disimo, chairman of the military court in Kisangani, described the two men as Norwegian spies - a charge rejected by Norway - and said they were a threat to Congo's security.
"(They) are active military officers as proved by their military cards, valid until 2016 and 2017. In that respect, they are de facto intelligence agents for their country," he told the court.
The two men had previously served in Norway's armed forces, but Norwegian diplomats say there has been no contact between the accused and their country's military or any other official organisation since 2007.
"These are people who have not acted on behalf of Norway and who are not tied to Norwegian authorities," Stoere said. French and Moland were reportedly in the country to set up their own security company, but the circumstances leading up to their arrest remain unclear.
When you switch off a video game, a really involving and engrossing video game, sometimes it doesn¡¯t go away. Not straight away. Instead, it can linger in the mind, overlaying the real world.
At least that¡¯s according to new research from Nottingham Trent University¡¯s International Gaming Research Unit. Recently published in the Journal of Cyber Behaviour, Psychology and Learning, it suggests that players often hear game sounds such as explosions, screams and laser fire, long after they¡¯ve left a game.This is the latest study into what the university calls ¡°game transfer phenomena¡±, a range of cognitive quirks that can follow extended gaming sessions. Previous research has concentrated on visual distortions and effects ? Tetris players seeing falling shapes when they closed their eyes, for example. The new paper is the first time that specifically auditory experiences have been analysed.
For the study, the Nottingham Trent team visited games forums and collected anecdotal evidence from 1,244 gamers about GTP experiences. 12 per cent of those spoke of re-experiencing game audio outside of the game environment ? hearing sword slashes, electronic beeps and Super Mario¡¯s falling coin sound were all reported.
¡°There were lots of examples of players hearing the game music, in the same way as you continue to hear music in your head when you¡¯ve stopped listening,¡± said psychology researcher Angelica Ortiz De Gortari, who is leading the study. ¡°Some players heard voices, some heard game sounds. Often it happens when you¡¯re trying to fall asleep ? players would look for their computer or console because they thought they¡¯d left the game on.¡±
The most interesting examples, however, are those that seem to be triggered by real-world cues that relate to in-game situations. One player reported hearing sounds from the first-person puzzle game Portal when passing specific buildings that reminded him of the game¡¯s world. De Gortari also discovered more disturbing examples: ¡°There was a gamer who, whenever it was dark, would hear the sound of the crackling radio signal from Silent Hill, warning him that monsters were coming.¡±
There is plenty of skepticism around GTP. The research is currently drawn from a very small base of players speaking to their peers on forums where exaggeration is always a possibility. It may be difficult to recreate these phenomena in a more accurate and controlled experiment. However, experiences similar to GTP have been studied since the early nineties. In 1994, Wired ran an article entitled ¡°This is your brain on Tetris¡±, detailing University of California research into the effect that the popular block-sorting puzzle game had on the brains of players.
The Nottingham Trent University team is very early in the process of understanding what¡¯s going on. De Gortari has theorised that GTP is about the way the brain assigns meaning to sensory inputs. ¡°These sounds have a meaning, a purpose in the video games ? and their meaning affects how players can respond in real life,¡± she said. ¡°Players hear the sound in their head or ears, or they externalise it. The research tells us about how the brain forms associations, and how easily they can be confused. It shows a lack of control over auditory experiences ? they can be disturbing, annoying or even funny.¡±
One of the goals of the project is to demystify GTP for players who have been frightened by the experience. The phenomena tend to last a few hours or days, and follow intense or very long gaming sessions. ¡°We want to identify, classify and explain these experiences,¡± said De Gortari. ¡°But this research also tells us about how the mind works, and how it creates associations, how we learn from associations - this may be useful in the learning of new languages, for example.¡°There¡¯s a lot of research into the effects of music, but not a lot into sound. What are the ramifications? There is lot to learn.¡±
Have you ever experienced game transfer phenomenon? Let us know in the comments section.
When we were nine or ten and used to play
at dying - hands clasped to the chest,
Goodbye, beautiful world, I love you! -
we didn't believe it could ever really be done.
Say goodbye to everything? A gunshot wound
in "Alias Smith and Jones" could set us thinking -
please please don't die - or a feathered mess
that had been a pigeon squashed on the road.
Even Divinity class, that final sponge of vinegar
on a speartip. Goodbye, beautiful vinegar.
Now, under the shag of decades, after so much
contact with things, it takes a morning like this.
Snow has fallen, a light crust. On the white field
green trails zigzag where the horses wandered,
a crazy scribble shows where they fed.
There they are now, two statues stooping.
All the ewes are sitting, thawing their grass.
Puddles crunch like caramel. Little snowfalls
crumble down a hedge. The silver-birch
trembles in its own twigs' shadows.
And under the rusty chestnut I walk
through a rain of crystals. There isn't much to say.
This is a day that decides by itself to be beautiful.
This field is a bride. How are we to say goodbye?
¡¤ Henry Shukman was chosen in June as one of 20 Next Generation poets. The poets read at a gala event chaired by Andrew Motion at the Bloomsbury Theatre, London, on November 28. Box office 020 7388 8822. www.thebloomsbury.com.
A couple shot dead by a gangland hit squad in their Lincolnshire bungalow were failed by a police force's mishandling of criminal intelligence, an inquest ruled today.
John and Joan Stirland were found at their home in the village of Trusthorpe on 8 August 2004, where they had been killed in a revenge attack by gunmen working for Nottingham crime boss Colin Gunn.
The inquest at Lincoln crown court heard that officers investigating Gunn's organised crime cartel as part of a secret investigation, codenamed Operation Utah, did not pass on relevant information to the Stirlands' family liaison officer about the threat they faced.
The double shooting was a revenge attack after Mrs Stirland's son, Michael O'Brien, shot 22-year-old Marvyn Bradshaw dead outside a Nottingham pub in August 2003. Criminals in Nottingham believed the bullet was meant for Bradshaw's friend and Colin Gunn's nephew, Jamie.
Gunn, who had persuaded police officers to provide him with information, and two other men were convicted of conspiring to murder the couple in 2006.
After 11 hours of deliberation and an inquest lasting more than three weeks, a jury today found that Nottinghamshire police failed to share intelligence about the threat posed to the couple by Gunn's gang.
The unanimous verdict also found that BT operators contributed to the couple's death by passing on information about them to Gunn and his associates.
But the jury cleared Lincolnshire police of failing to protect Stirland, 55, and his 51-year-old wife after they were asked by Nottinghamshire police to call in on the couple hours before they were found murdered. The jury recorded two verdicts of unlawful killing.
The coroner, Karon Monaghan QC, said she would consider whether to make a further report following the jury's findings. "I offer my sincere condolences to the family of Mr and Mrs Stirland," she said.
The inquest was watched by Michael O'Brien via a video link from prison. It heard that, despite Mrs Stirland speaking to her family liaison officer shortly before 2pm on 8 August to report a stalker, the couple did not receive a visit from Lincolnshire police until 9.30pm.
By that time the couple were both dead. Mr Stirland had been shot six times in the chest. His wife, a nurse, suffered four gunshot wounds. The bullet to her neck was fatal.
The inquest was also told that detectives failed to hand over intelligence about a shooting involving one of Gunn's associates in Sutton on Sea, near Trusthorpe, to officers in charge of protecting the Stirlands.
Detectives working on the murder of Bradshaw and dealing regularly with the Stirlands did not even know about Operation Utah because it was so secret, it was said. They did not therefore ask whether Gunn had any links to the Trusthorpe area when they moved there in December 2003.
The couple came under threat from Gunn after O'Brien shot Bradshaw dead outside the Sporting Chance pub in Bulwell, Nottingham, in August 2003. Jamie Gunn was in the same car as Bradshaw at the time and held his friend as he died.
Following the death, Jamie Gunn turned to drink and drugs to help him cope. But he never recovered and on 2 August 2004, he died at the age of 19 from pneumonia, just days after 23-year-old O'Brien was jailed for a minimum of 24 years for murdering his friend.
Colin Gunn believed the bullet was meant for his nephew and blamed O'Brien for Jamie Gunn's subsequent death.
The audience was still chatting and making their way to their seats when the lights suddenly went dark and gunshots echoed across the Paper Mill Playhouse on Sunday night. It was startling for a second ? especially in an era where mass shootings are not uncommon ? but then forgotten as the play began with the aftermath of an averted attack.
The opening scene of The Bodyguard: The Musical, which began its US tour in Millburn, New Jersey, on 25 November, mimicked that of the 1992 film it¡¯s based upon almost exactly. But from there the stage version veered into its own music-forward, funny, fast-paced operation. Judson Mills (who acted on Walker, Texas Ranger and, more recently, Westworld) plays the title character, Frank Farmer, a seasoned protector who is reluctant to take on the duty of guarding one of the world¡¯s most well-known pop stars.
In the film version, Kevin Costner¡¯s Frank channels Steve McQueen (whom Lawrence Kasdan allegedly wrote the role for in the 1970s), all quiet, cool confidence and mysterious weariness. Mills¡¯ Frank Farmer is equally self-secure, but an extrovert who says things like ¡°crystal¡± when someone asks if something is clear. Even when he¡¯s delivering lines directly copied from the film, his easygoing frankness transforms them, garnering laughter from the audience and lending to the self-awareness of the play.
The thing about The Bodyguard is, the film was not great ? not in critical terms. It was a rain-day romantic thriller ? fun to watch for sure, but good? No. The soundtrack, however, was indisputably good. It was a No 1 album for five months, it won a Grammy and it¡¯s still the best-selling soundtrack of all time. The film was essentially a vehicle for the music, but unwilling to admit to it ? whereas the play owns up to that and then some.
The live show never takes the plot too seriously, unlike the film, opting instead to present a celebration of Whitney Houston¡¯s music. With extra Houston songs packed in, nearly every scene is framed around one of her hits: dancers in 90s-style workout gear practice a routine to How Will I Know, three drunk women in a bar do a hilarious karaoke rendition of Where Do Broken Hearts Go (and nail the brief tempo change) and then freak out when Rachel Marron ? the pop star role with which Houston made her acting debut in the film ? steps up to sing one of her own songs, I Have Nothing (the play is set in current times which means, naturally, this moment later becomes a viral video).
In the musical Marron is played by Deborah Cox, a Canadian musician whose 1998 song Nobody¡¯s Supposed to Be Here held the record for longest running at number one on the R&B charts until Mary J Blige surpassed it in 2006, and has since moved on to Broadway, with roles in Aida and Jekyll & Hyde.
Cox seemed slightly unsure at first, perhaps aware of the enormity of playing a role that Houston came to define, but was stronger in the second act, particularly when she performed One Moment in Time at a pivotal plot moment and closed out the show with The Big Song, a cover of Dolly Parton¡¯s I Will Always Love You, a song that was unavoidable on pop radio and elsewhere in the US for a large stretch of the 90s. Cox¡¯s voice shone simply and beautifully in the song¡¯s a capella intro, standing alone on stage with only a spotlight then later, after a quick costume change, in a sequin and feather dress on a rising platform. It was a near-perfect performance, save for a few cringe-making romantic visuals of Cox and Farmer on a large screen to buy time for the aforementioned costume change.
The show¡¯s other notable stars were Jasmin Richardson, who plays Rachel¡¯s sister Nicki Marron and sang Saving All My Love with a deep, emotional elegance, and Douglas Baldeo, who plays Rachel¡¯s son, Fletcher, and has the voice and dance moves of a young Michael Jackson. (Seriously, they should give this kid even more stage time. Maybe performing something off of My Love is Your Love?)
After the final bow, the full cast sang I Wanna Dance With Somebody and the already standing audience began to move ? and with a disco dance party we were delivered back out into the quiet suburban streets on a wintry night.
Hello ? it¡¯s Warren Murray bringing you this morning¡¯s summary of the news.
The Texas church gunman was able to buy firearms because the air force apparently failed to submit his record of extreme domestic violence to a criminal database, it has emerged. Devin Kelley, 26, received a bad-conduct discharge in 2014 after serving a year in military prison for ¡°assault on his spouse and child¡± that included life-endangering beatings and threats with guns. But his alarming history did not show up on national background checks when he was arming himself ahead of his rampage on Sunday.
A bystander who shot at Kelley and the driver he flagged down to pursue the gunman have told their stories. At the end of their chase, Kelley was found dead in his crashed car with a suspected self-inflicted gunshot wound.
Kelley¡¯s victims included a pregnant women and three of her children, and an 18-month-old child. The pastor of Sutherland Springs First Baptist church, Frank Pomeroy, said after the shooting in which his 14-year-old daughter, Annabelle, was killed: ¡°You lean in to what you don¡¯t understand, you lean in to the Lord.¡±
Sky-high tax refunds ? The F1 driver Lewis Hamilton is among the latest famous names dug up from the Paradise Papers. Hamilton¡¯s advisers put his purchase of a private jet through the Isle of Man and recouped ¡Ì3.3m in VAT as a result, according to documents. HMRC is set to examine schemes under which Hamilton and others effectively leased their own jets from themselves. There is no suggestion the racing champion himself acted illegally, but experts say the validity of such schemes is questionable. Bono, the U2 frontman, has said he wants to know the truth about whether a Lithuanian shopping centre he invested in has broken tax rules, and called for transparency about ownership of offshore companies. ¡°The fact is, I welcome this reporting. It shouldn¡¯t take leaks to understand what¡¯s going on where.¡± Theresa May has refused to commit to action over tax havens following the Paradise Papers revelations. Labour¡¯s John McDonnell says that with the likes of Tory donor Lord Ashcroft attracting scrutiny, the fingers point too close to home for the Conservatives.
Brexit show-and-tell ? The government has been given until this evening to release Brexit impact assessments on 58 sectors of the economy or explain to the Commons why it has failed to do so. David Davis, the Brexit secretary, has complained that the material encompasses an array of documents and collating them takes time. But the Speaker, John Bercow, has said the government should comply ¡°very promptly indeed¡± with MPs¡¯ unanimous demand to hand them over to the Brexit select committee. Britain will have to get used to the taste of chlorinated chicken, judging by what Donald Trump¡¯s commerce secretary is saying, if it wants to strike a post-Brexit trade deal with his administration. Wilbur Ross suggested other bothersome EU red tape on, oh let¡¯s see, the safety and origin of your food, trade in chemicals, medical implants, car standards, that sort of thing, would have to go as well.
One and only ? Could this be the return of Silvio Berlusconi? The centre-right bloc backed by Old Bunga Bunga is poised for victory in a Sicilian regional election. Berlusconi meanwhile is hoping the European court of human rights will overturn his 2013 tax fraud conviction, which bars him from running for office. He is 81, but has been out campaigning after open-heart surgery, and even if he remains unable to stand for election the ex-PM threatens to be a potent force in a national vote set for next May.
UN¡¯s Rohingya plea ? The security council has called on Myanmar to end a military campaign and allow the return of hundreds of thousands of Rohingya Muslims who have been driven across the border into Bangladesh. Since late August more than 600,000 Rohingya have been driven from their homes by an army campaign that the UN has described as ethnic cleansing. The Myanmar government, whose de facto leader is Aung San Suu Kyi, says the military operation is aimed at rooting out Rohingya militants.
Flipped out of a job ? The Virginia cyclist whose raised digit became an embodiment of mass sentiment towards Donald Trump has been fired from her job. Juli Briskman flipped the bird to the president¡¯s motorcade as it drove past. When the picture went viral, she thought alerting the HR department at her employer, Akima, was the right thing to do. Their response: ¡°We¡¯re separating from you.¡±
There was an admirable amount of political awareness powering that middle finger: ¡°I¡¯m thinking, Daca recipients are getting kicked out. He pulled ads for open enrolment in Obamacare. Only one-third of Puerto Rico has power. I¡¯m thinking, he¡¯s at the damn golf course again.¡± Briskman said she had no regrets and wanted to find a new job somewhere with a social conscience. In Japan, Trump has met his fellow hand-gesture enthusiast Pikotaro, creator of the YouTube hit Pen Pineapple Apple Pen. Pikotaro said it was an honour. Trump didn¡¯t tweet about it.
¡®Yes that bloody cat¡¯ ? A feline intruder nearly caused an international incident when newly minted New Zealand PM Jacinda Ardern took a phone call in her living room from Donald Trump. ¡°She leapt up onto the chair next to Jacinda and began announcing her very squawky arrival,¡± writes Ardern¡¯s partner, Clarke Gayford. ¡°There was a flurry of action as I tried to hustle it into the next room.¡± One of the little things Gayford remembers from the hurly-burly of Ardern¡¯s ascent to the country¡¯s top office.
Revolutions are normally expected to come from outside the halls or palace corridors of power. But the convention has been upended in Saudi Arabia, where the heir to the throne has dramatically placed 30 senior royals under arrest on graft charges.
Prince Mohammed is seeking to shatter the nexus between the elite and the state and open the country up to the world ? especially much-needed foreign investors who demand business transparency. But can he keep it up? Family rivals who oppose his reforms say the purge of the princes is a power grab: ¡°How can you get away with something like this?¡±
Donald Trump isn¡¯t getting in Prince Mohammed¡¯s way after the arrests, which were made with little warning or legal process. Some of those detained had been ¡°milking their country for years!¡±, tweeted Trump ? who, as it happens, has been courting Saudi Arabia to list its Aramco oil company on the New York stock exchange or Nasdaq.
The exit of Chelsea¡¯s veteran technical director, Michael Emenalo, has left the Blues¡¯ board exposed and vulnerable to criticism without their most stable lightning-rod, while the injured Tottenham duo Harry Kane and Harry Winks have pulled out of England¡¯s upcoming friendlies. In rugby, all eyes are on Ellis Genge, the promising Leicester loosehead, who seems set to start Saturday¡¯s match against Argentina. And in Australia, trainer Joseph O¡¯Brien trumped his father Aidan as Irish horse Rekindling won the Melbourne Cup, 24 years after the last Irish champion, Vintage Crop.
Asian shares rallied to their highest in a decade overnight, while oil prices gave up some of their gains having previously surged to a more than two-year peak following the anti-corruption purge by Saudi Arabia¡¯s crown prince.
Sterling has been trading at $1.317 and ¢æ1.134 overnight.
The Guardian continues with the latest in the welter of information from the Paradise Papers, leading on news that Formula One world champion Lewis Hamilton benefited from a scheme based in the Isle of Man to avoid taxes on his private jet ? a story also picked up by the Mirror (which slams what it calls ¡°the tax dodge parasites¡±), the i and Metro.
The Sun follows up on news from the leaked documents that stars of Mrs Brown¡¯s Boys used offshore companies to avoid paying taxes, and the Times covers the revelations about Apple¡¯s move to Jersey.
Elsewhere, the Telegraph opts for US commerce secretary Wilbur Ross dangling a trade deal in front of post-Brexit Britain ? as long as it drops EU rules such as those against chlorinated chicken. And the Daily Mail leads on the chances missed to help 18-month-old Elsie Scully-Hicks, whose adoptive father was yesterday found guilty of her murder.
If you would like to receive the Guardian Morning Briefing by email, bright and early every weekday, sign up here.
The family of a second young soldier who died at Deepcut barracks in Surrey might be granted a second inquest into his death.
The brother and sister of Pte Sean Benton who was found with five bullet wounds to his chest at the base 21 years ago have been given permission to apply to the high court for the original inquest to be quashed and a fresh one ordered.
The coroner at the first inquest held in July 1995, a month after Benton¡¯s death, recorded a verdict of suicide. Benton¡¯s family estimate the inquest took less than two hours and say it heard from six people. A criminal investigation by Surrey police seven years later found no evidence of third-party involvement.
Benton, 20, from Hastings, Sussex, was the first of four young recruits to die from gunshot wounds at Deepcut between 1995 and 2002. The attorney general Jeremy Wright QC cleared the way for the high court application less than two weeks after a three-month inquest into the death of 18-year-old Pte Cheryl James in November 1995 concluded that she had shot herself.
Benton¡¯s twin brother, Tony, and his sister Tracey Lewis, applied last year. As in James¡¯s case, the application for a new inquest was only possible because Benton¡¯s mother, Linda, who died last year, used the Human Rights Act to persuade Surrey police to disclose evidence about her son¡¯s death. She had been supported by the human rights charity Liberty.
Lewis, Benton¡¯s older sister, said: ¡°We have been overwhelmed and disturbed by all the details of the shameful environment at Deepcut which have finally come to light through the Cheryl James inquest. It is terrible to think of Sean alone there.
¡°More than two decades after our brother died ? and having lost both our parents in recent years ? Tony and I are determined to find out what happened to Sean.¡±
Emma Norton, the family¡¯s solicitor from Liberty, said: ¡°Sean¡¯s family have waited 21 years for this moment ? and it is a source of immense sadness that his parents are not here to take this vital next step in their search for justice.¡±
The two other young soldiers who died from gunshot wounds were Pte Geoff Gray, from Hackney, east London, who was found dead with two wounds to his head in September 2001, and Pte James Collinson, 17, from Perth, Scotland, who was found with a single shotgun wound through his chin in March 2002.
The inquest into James¡¯s death, which ended earlier this month, concluded there had been a highly sexualised and alcohol fuelled environment at the barracks.
Police investigating the London Bridge attack searched two more properties in east London as they prepared to name the three men who killed seven people.
Counter-terrorism officers detained ¡°a number of people¡± after raiding addresses in Newham and Barking at 4.15am on Monday, the Metropolitan police said.
Pedestrians were mowed down by a rental van on London Bridge on Saturday night before attackers stabbed a police officer and members of the public around Borough Market with 12in knives. NHS England said on Monday that there are still 36 people being treated in hospital for their injuries but the number of those in critical care has fallen from 21 to 18.
As police continued inquiries into people linked with the attackers a bitter political row erupted on Monday over cuts to police funding on Theresa May¡¯s watch while home secretary. The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, backed calls for the prime minister to resign while May dodged accusations that the number of officers is down by 20,000 since 2010 and the number of armed police has also fallen.
Speaking on a visit to London Bridge alongside the Met police commissioner, Cressida Dick, the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, said the Met had already lost ¡Ì600m from its budget, was facing a ¡Ì400m cut over the next four years and could lose a further ¡Ì700m under changes to the police funding formula.
¡°We need to make sure the police have the resources and support they need, and as the mayor my job is to make our city safe and I¡¯ll do my best as the mayor to be an advocate and champion for our police to get the tools they need.¡±
He condemned the ideology followed by the attackers, saying it is ¡°perverse, it is poisonous and it has no place in Islam¡±.
Standing on London Bridge, Dick said that arming more officers was not a solution to preventing future attacks. But earlier she told ITV¡¯s Good Morning Britain: ¡°In the face of this changing and changed threat, absolutely I will be seeking for London and for policing generally more resourcing obviously.¡±
One east London resident reported ¡°loud flash bangs and gunshots¡± in the early hours of Monday morning as the latest raids took place. BatemanLDN wrote on Twitter: ¡°It woke me up along with the whole street. Extremely loud bangs followed by gunshot bangs.¡±
On Sunday, four other addresses were raided in Barking, including the home of one of the suspected attackers, and East Ham. Scotland Yard said seven women and five men aged between 19 and 60 were arrested under the Terrorism Act. A 55-year-old man was released later without charge.
Police said they knew the identities of the attackers and would name them ¡°as soon as operationally possible¡±. Witnesses said one of the attackers shouted ¡°this is for Allah¡± as he stabbed a man near a pub. Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack in a statement.
The first known victim of the attack was named as Christine Archibald from Castlegar, Canada. In a statement, her family said: ¡°We grieve the loss of our beautiful, loving daughter and sister. She had room in her heart for everyone and believed strongly that every person was to be valued and respected.¡±
A French man was also among those killed, according to the French foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian.
Two Australians, Candice Hedge from Brisbane and Andrew Morrison from Darwin, were wounded. Australian government officials said there were two more nationals ¡°about whom we have very real concerns¡±.
A vigil for the victims will be held on Monday evening at Potters Fields Park near London Bridge and City Hall.A British Transport Police officer was stabbed in the head, face and leg after taking on the attackers armed only with his baton. Three Metropolitan police officers were injured, including one who was off-duty. He was injured while tackling the men and is in a serious condition in hospital.
A friend of one of the attackers told BBC Asian Network he had reported him to the anti-terror hotline after he began expressing increasingly radical views and justifying terror attacks, but the man said he was never arrested.
Giving an update on the investigation outside New Scotland Yard in London, the Met assistant commissioner Mark Rowley said ¡°significant progress¡± had been made in identifying the attackers.
As well as more armed police across the capital in coming days, ¡°the public will also see increased physical measures in order to keep [the] public safe on London¡¯s bridges¡±, he said.
A woman was accidentally shot in the head at a party by a man who intended to fire his gun "Wild West style" at the ceiling, a court heard today.
Natasha Derby, 23, had organised the Summer Jam music event at the Multicultural Centre in High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, at which she died.
She was standing near the exit as the event drew to a close in the early hours of 4 September 2004, when witnesses heard a gunshot ring out in the main hall. Many fled the centre as paramedics rushed to help Derby, but she had suffered horrific injuries and died in hospital the next day. Reston Braham, 47, one of the partygoers, is accused of firing the fatal shot, but denies manslaughter.
John Price QC, prosecuting, told a jury at Reading crown court: "There is no earthly reason why anyone would have wanted to shoot that young woman. The more likely explanation of what happened that night is that Mr Braham took the gun with him to the club so that he might entertain himself with it, by firing it Wild West style, into the ceiling to accompany a particular piece of music."
His plan went awry when he incorrectly aimed the handgun, Price said. "The bullet left the gun, not pointed at the ceiling but at Natasha Derby, with the consequence she was hit in the head and died."
The weapon was never found, but investigators believe it was a blank-firing replica handgun that had been converted to fire live rounds.
Braham and his friends Michelle Phillips, 44, Hazel Forde, also 44, and Dwayne Haughton, who was originally charged with Miss Derby's murder, returned to their homes in Reading, Berkshire, together that night.
Haughton, whose fingerprints were on the bullet cartridge found among beer bottles on the floor of the centre, was found not guilty of causing the death following a trial in 2005.
Witnesses say although Haughton was in the hall at the time of the shooting, he had his arms around a woman he was dancing with. He was, however, found guilty of possessing ammunition at that trial.
Forde and Phillips are also standing trial alongside Braham, accused of staging a cover-up to protect his name.
Braham, of Caversham, Reading, denies manslaughter. Forde and Phillips, both also from Caversham, deny perverting the course of justice.
The trial is expected to last up to three weeks.
To say that politics plays on the mind of Matthew Herbert would be something of an understatement. When I arrive at his beachfront recording studio in Whitstable, Kent, he gives me a tour of his studio, pointing out that the mixing desk sits on a raised platform to safeguard it from global warming-related flooding. Next door is a venue that hosts wedding parties, which has had the unfortunate effect of forcing Herbert to view romance as he would any other industry: ¡°Every couple ask for the same ¡®individual touches¡¯,¡± he notes. Earlier, Herbert had picked me and the Guardian¡¯s photographer up from the station in his 1971 Mini van ? the perfect vehicle in which to bemoan the way capitalism has conspired to diminish build quality in modern cars.
Nowhere does his relentlessly questioning brain work harder than on his inventive records. Under various guises, Herbert has made music out of everything from a pig¡¯s life cycle (One Pig, for which he received death threats) to a day¡¯s edition of the Guardian. He¡¯s snuck into the Houses of Parliament to shake matchboxes next to John Major, and driven a tank over the site where Nigella Lawson once cooked a meal for Tony Blair and George Bush. On his studio wall is a framed apple pie tin, complete with bullet holes. ¡°We shot that with Nazi weaponry, an SD officer¡¯s 1939 Luger,¡± he notes. ¡°Normally gunshot sounds are recorded from the position of the gun. This was recorded from the pie, so in terms of perspective that¡¯s actually what it sounds like to be shot. Which means the natural audience who might recognise that sound will probably have been killed.¡±
His latest album, recorded under his Herbert moniker, is the (relatively) straight ahead The Shakes. A jazz-infused house record complete with sumptuous chord changes and the odd gently euphoric chorus, it proves that Herbert can still be an adept pop musician as well as an ideas man. Yet while he claims he found ¡°joyful release¡± in just writing music for the sake of it, rather than under a strict conceptual framework, it¡¯s still bristling with ideas under the surface.
For a start, it features the sounds of used bullets, UK protest marches and a piano from Wormwood Scrubs prison. For another, it uses them to emphasise an overriding theme: bringing children into a world in which we have virtually no control.
¡°Having kids drives home to you what an idiotic system we¡¯ve built,¡± he says. ¡°For instance, at a kids¡¯ party everyone gets a party favour with all these sweets full of chemicals that aren¡¯t properly tested on human health and these cheap plastic toys that last a minute and a half and then go straight in the bin, and then for 5,000 years in the ground. You don¡¯t want to be a dick and say no presents and make it hard for the parents and embarrass my own child ¡¦ but at the same time I¡¯m watching him eat food that has some of the same ingredients as breast implants! The chicken lived a miserable life, nobody got paid properly, it¡¯s exploitative and poisonous ¡¦ and yet it¡¯s someone¡¯s birthday party, it should be fun and happy.¡± He smiles, realising he¡¯s off on a rant again: ¡°And I should just fucking relax.¡±
Herbert has always been political. The son of ¡°eccentric¡± parents, he was a Greenpeace organiser at school and got a hard time for not having a television or ¡°a pair of long trousers until I was 12¡±. When he was 10, his grandfather gave him a fifth edition copy of The Communist Manifesto, and he nods towards his grandfather¡¯s influence by playing his piano on one of The Shakes¡¯s standout tracks, Smart.
Yet it wasn¡¯t until university in the early 90s, while swept up in the free party scene, that Herbert became properly politicised.
¡°It felt like the only real time where I had participated in a truly classless act,¡± he says. ¡°You had very rich farmers and their kids letting us have a couple of fields to do a party full of football hooligans, students, crusties and travellers.¡±
Watching this freedom blip get gobbled up by capitalism ? and depoliticised and sanitised in the process ? was a depressing affair for Herbert. Why does he think all the energy that goes into things like the free party fails to get translated into more strident political acts?
¡°I think because there¡¯s risk involved. You might kill the party, or people might disagree. But we¡¯ve got to start taking risks if we¡¯re going to change the world for the better and slow down climate change or deal with corrupt financial systems.¡± He quotes Naomi Klein, who said the only thing we need to do to destroy ourselves is to carry on the way we are: ¡°It¡¯s very hard to not see music as part of the status quo,¡± he says.
The more you talk to Herbert, the more you realise that he views music as a complete metaphor for the way we¡¯re living. It¡¯s not just that he thinks music can be more than entertainment ? he thinks seeing music as mere entertainment can be inherently dangerous.
He points out that music soundtracks the majority of our lives, from getting on planes to eating in canteens, and questions what its true purpose is: ¡°The majority of the messages we¡¯re getting [from music] are: ¡®Hey, everything¡¯s cool, everything¡¯s safe, don¡¯t worry¡¯. It starts to feel politically really uncomfortable. Has music just become this big security blanket? Has it been absorbed into the current economic system to the point where it¡¯s just happy to tell us constantly that everything¡¯s all right? A decorative wallpaper for this destructive, hideous bubble that we live in these days?¡±
Increasingly, Herbert has been trying to use music to fight the system. He¡¯s done so directly, with The End of Silence ? a record made out of a five-second sample of a pro-Gaddafi plane dropping a bomb over Libya that killed three people ? and the lyrics to songs on the new album such as Strong, which addresses inequality directly: ¡°You might have the yacht but we still have the water.¡±
But he¡¯s also done it with a dizzying palette of sounds ? making music for political purposes out of everything from the World Trade Centre attacks to the top 10 selling items in Tesco. How does he expect the average listener to pick such sounds up?
¡°I don¡¯t like the idea of an average listener,¡± he replies. ¡°You and I might not know what bullets sound like but there are plenty of people who do. There are people out there who know what a protest march sounds like. We¡¯re so used to being handed things on a plate, whereas I¡¯m interested in the journey one might make to find out what those sounds are. I don¡¯t expect everyone to get every nuance of every sound ? it¡¯s about layers and layers and layers of meaning.
¡°Music doesn¡¯t exist in a vacuum. It has a title, you read about it, you see the artwork. If I named a song about, say, the price of milk, someone would have to talk about the appalling price that farmers get for milk from supermarkets. That¡¯s incredible power you¡¯ve got.¡±
When talking of artistic power, Herbert likes to mention the sampler, which has opened up a world of sound to musicians that he feels isn¡¯t being taken advantage of fully. ¡°I can now make music out of a banana, or David Cameron, or Belgium,¡± he says. ¡°It¡¯s such a profound revolution that if I¡¯m going to make music about prices of bananas in Jamaica, or the banana wars in Latin America, then to use the sound of an apple would seem totally irrelevant. So regardless of if anyone ¡®gets¡¯ it, I feel a responsibility to use those sounds, otherwise you¡¯re talking gibberish. If you¡¯re assembling a language by which to communicate, you need to make sure the language has integrity and the words make sense.¡±
Of course, technology has given us the power to make anything sound like virtually anything else. Yet Herbert believes musicians have a responsibility to select their sounds properly.
¡°There¡¯s no point making a banana sound like a guitar,¡± he argues. ¡°You might as well use a guitar. Its important to make the sound readable. Unless the political point is to disguise or transform it.¡± He adds, with a hint of glee: ¡°I¡¯ve managed to sneak all sorts of noises into things ? some big, international projects ? that I couldn¡¯t possibly talk about.¡±
This is the thing with Herbert and his musical projects. On first hearing of them, they might seem madcap, but after speaking to him about them it¡¯s all the other musicians ? with an entire soundworld at their disposal and electing to use only well-trodden sounds - who look crazy.
In 2005, Herbert wrote his Personal Contract for the Composition of Music (Incorporating The Manifesto of Mistakes) ? in it, he criticised the use of drum machines and studio presets, which seems to extend the metaphor between life and music: much of Herbert¡¯s daily conflicts arise from trying to live ¡°well¡± under a capitalist system; likewise, his music tries to adhere to certain rules no matter how difficult it makes it.
¡°It¡¯s about taking responsibility for the things that I can, and music is one of those areas,¡± he says. ¡°I guess that¡¯s one reason why I feel compelled to go to these bizarre lengths.¡± He looks around his studio and appears crestfallen: ¡°But, you know, I¡¯m still using an Apple Mac built in awful conditions. The majority of the technology here was developed by the military. The vocoder was made so that Winston Churchill could disguise his voice during the war. So we¡¯re all hypocrites.¡±
Herbert¡¯s next project will be a record that dispenses with the compromises of record-making entirely. A book published by Unbound, it describes the record he would make if he had unlimited resources. ¡°It could be the sound of 2,515 alarm clocks for Bangladeshi garment workers going off at the same time, or it could be the sound of Samantha Cameron rubbing sun cream on David Cameron¡¯s back,¡± he enthuses. Ironically, he says that after years of struggling to convey ideas with music, he found the ¡°greatest liberation in words, in describing instead of doing¡±.
Still, Herbert believes sound is an undervalued resource, able to travel around corners and through the darkness. He praises the way it can be more evocative than image (¡°If I played you the sound of the sea we would both imagine something different¡±) and requires us to be quiet to appreciate: ¡°In an era of Donald Trump and the Daily Mail there¡¯s something profoundly important about shutting up.¡±
Sound also allows you, at least in 2015, the freedom to document things that a video camera couldn¡¯t. ¡°When I did the food record [Plat Du Jour] I went into an intensive chicken farm to record, which you¡¯d never get in with a camera. It really is somewhere between the wild west and a total utopia.¡±
I mention a track he made as Radio Boy, which sampled the sound of a Starbucks caramel latte being poured away. This seems devilishly subversive ? he was manipulating a branded product for artistic purposes in a way he would never be able to do with their visual logo.
¡°I do think that in 100 years¡¯ time, Starbucks will have patented the sound of their coffee,¡± he says. ¡°Which is why I see this moment as a golden age of sound, where we¡¯re free to do anything. And that¡¯s why I feel a responsibility to push on, to make things difficult for myself and to go into those uncomfortable areas.¡±
? Matthew Herbert plays at the Royal Festival Hall, London, on 23 August as part of David Byrne¡¯s Meltdown. Sign up for The Music at unbound.co.uk
The police officer who shot Walter Scott radioed in to claim that Scott had ¡°grabbed my Taser¡±, six seconds after firing his final shot, despite video suggesting the unarmed man was not in possession of the stun gun at any point, a Guardian analysis has shown.
Syncing police scanner audio with a shocking video ? the eyewitness footage out of South Carolina which led to officer Michael Slager being charged with murder ? raises further questions about whether either of two officers on the video performed any CPR on Scott as was previously claimed by police.
Analysis of the police radio shows Slager, the officer who shot at Scott eight times, making the radio call announcing the shots and alleging the Taser seizure, sounding frantic and breathless at the same time as he walks slowly towards Scott¡¯s body.
¡°Shots fired. Subject is down. He grabbed my Taser,¡± the scanner audio from Slager states.
He reaches the body, handcuffs Scott who has his head down to the floor and walks back to the area where it appears an object was dropped and picks up an item from the ground.
At this point a second officer, now identified as Clarence Habersham, arrives on the scene and radios in. Slager then walks back towards the body and radios in stating: ¡°I need to secure my vehicle¡±. At this point ? over a minute after the last shot is fired ? neither officer appears to have performed CPR on Scott.
Slager then walks and drops the item, which some have speculated is a Taser, next to Scott¡¯s body.
At this point Habersham radios in to say he has detected gunshots to Scott¡¯s chest on the right side. He then radios to say he has detected a gunshot wound to the buttocks. He appears to be pulling Scott¡¯s T-shirt up at this point.
At a press conference on Wednesday North Charleston police chief Eddie Driggers said after watching the video he believed an officer had lifted Scott¡¯s T-shirt to perform ¡°some sort of life-saving procedure¡±.
But analysis of the video and audio suggests Habersham is actually identifying the gunshot wounds rather than performing any such procedure.
At the end of the video, over two minutes after the last shot is fired, Slager stands over Scott¡¯s body and takes a pulse.
The combination of the video and audio footage shows that the encounter between Slager and Scott started about four and a half minutes before the scenes now seen on televisions around the world.
As Slager began stopping Scott at the intersection of Remount Road and Craig Road at about 9.35am, he radioed the dispatcher to say he was ¡°coming up on a grey ... Mercedes¡±.
Exactly three minutes later, Slager radioed again to announce he was chasing on foot down Craig, giving his dispatcher a basic description of Scott. ¡°Black male, green shirt, blue pants,¡± he said.
About 25 seconds later a colleague radioed to say he was ¡°en route¡± to assist. Ten seconds on, there was another message ? possibly from the same officer ? asking Slager (¡°223¡±) ¡°What¡¯s your direction of travel there?¡±
After he received no response, this officer asked Slager again: ¡°Where you at now?¡± Eight seconds later, however, there was a clue to why Slager may not have been responding. In a burst of confused radio chatter, an officer can be heard shouting ¡°on the ground!¡±
The dispatcher had asked all officers to ensure radio silence for matters apart from the Slager-Scott chase. Feidin Santana, a bystander who filmed the shooting on his cellphone, told NBC on Wednesday evening that the pair were struggling on the ground before he began recording.
Another 47 seconds pass before the supporting officer radioed again: ¡°I¡¯m at the pawn shop,¡± he said. ¡°Where you at now?¡±
Just three seconds later ? at 9.38am, almost five minutes after Slager announced that he was stopping Scott in his car ? Slager was back on the radio. ¡°223, shots fired,¡± he said. ¡°Subject is down. He grabbed my Taser.¡±
Staff Sergeant Denise Rose of the Royal Military Police's special investigation branch was found dead from a gunshot wound at the army base in the Shatt-al-Arab hotel on Sunday, the MoD said.
It added that the death was being investigated but was "not thought to have been the result of hostile action".
Staff Sgt Rose, who had been in Iraq for barely a month, was 34 and came from Liverpool. She is the first British female soldier to die in Iraq since the invasion last year.
The military police in Basra have been investigating a series of incidents involving British soldiers and Iraqi civilians, including a number which have led to fatalities.
Her death brings to 70 the number of British service personnel who have died in the Iraq conflict since the start of hostilities in March 2003. Fewer than half were the result of hostile fire. Six military policemen were killed by Iraqis near Basra last year in an incident yet to be fully explained.
Denise Rose joined the military police in 1989, and trained as an special investigator in 1995, the MoD said.
It added that she was deployed as a volunteer to Iraq on September 27, as part of a small team of specialist investigators "to provide security for the people of Iraq and assist in the rebuilding of the country through the provision of a well-trained police force".
Lt Col Robert Silk , commanding officer of her parent unit, based in Germany, described her death as a "terrible shock". He said she had "a multitude of friends, being universally popular, intelligent and ever cheerful".
¡¤ Black Watch troops came under bombardment yesterday as rebels stepped up rocket attacks against their desert base at Camp Dogwood.
The army said seven rockets were fired in the first daylight attacks since the controversial deployment on Friday.
As we wrap up today¡¯s live coverage of the aftermath of the Munich shooting, here¡¯s a summation of what we know thus far.
A 25-year-old man shot in north London over the weekend was an aspiring musician who died following an argument in a recording studio, according to reports.
Police and paramedics were called to Sunnyside Road in Islington just before 9pm on Saturday after reports of gunshots. They found the victim, named in local media as Dawud, with a gunshot wound.
He was pronounced dead just after midnight on Sunday. Friends of the man said he lived locally and had a young daughter.
The Metropolitan police said: ¡°Detectives from the homicide and major crime command are investigating ¡¦ No arrests have been made and enquires continue.¡±
A 21-year-old man who said he had called police after discovering the victim in the doorway to the studio said the sight had troubled him. ¡°Initially I thought he had been knocked out or something. But then I saw his head open,¡± he told the Evening Standard. ¡°He had obviously been shot and there was blood everywhere. He was dying.¡±
Friends of the victim reportedly gathered at the scene on Sunday night and lit candles. One told the Standard: ¡°He was a really good guy and a father. And at the same time he used to do a lot to try and be a good influence on the youth in the area.
¡°He was very popular and most importantly a very devout Muslim. It¡¯s always the good guys this happens to.¡±
Two of the candles lit at the vigil were still burning on Monday afternoon, and a cordon remained in place around the spot where the victim was shot. Two bunches of flowers had been placed by the side of the cordon, both with messages saying ¡°RIP David¡±.
The attention of police forensic investigators was focused on Big House Studios, at the top of Sunnyside Road, and a forensic tent stood in the middle of the street.